CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HIRAM, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2013 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS  of the  CITY OF  HIRAM, GEORGIA  AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Doris A. Devey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Derrick Battle, Post 4 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Prather Rollins, Post 1 
Kathy Bookout, Post 2 
Teresa Philyaw, Post 3 
Earlene Graham, Post 5 
City Council 
____________ 
Robert T. Rokovitz 
City Manager 
____________ 
Cynthia L. Geyer 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS  of the  CITY OF  HIRAM, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Teresa Philyaw 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kathy Bookout 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Frank Moran, Post 1 
Kathy Bookout, Post 2 
Jeff B. Cole, Post 3 
Derrick Battle, Post 4 
City Council 
____________ 
Jody Palmer 
City Manager 
____________ 
Melissa Chosewood 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as updated by ordinances subsequently adopted by the Mayor and City Council through January 8, 2013. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of Codes of Ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Cynthia Geyer, City Administrator/City Clerk, and Mrs. Teresa Philyaw, City Councilmember, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hiram, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hiram, Georgia. 2013. 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
CITY OF HIRAM 
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-3 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HIRAM, GEORGIA CODIFYING EXISTING CITY ORDINANCES; PROMULGATING, ADOPTING, AND ENACTING A NEW CODE AS A COMPREHENSIVE, UNITARY CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF HIRAM, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, the Governing Authority of the City of Hiram, Georgia desired adopting a comprehensive, codified collection of City ordinances to be known as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia;" 
WHEREAS, the Governing Authority directed that the necessary steps be taken to compile the City's ordinances for the purpose of their organization, codification, and publication as a unified collection of ordinances to be known as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia;" 
WHEREAS, those steps were undertaken which included, in part, employing Municipal Code Corporation ("Municode") as the official codifier of what would be known as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia;" 
WHEREAS, the Governing Authority has now been presented with a comprehensive, organized set of materials by Municode to be adopted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia;" 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING AUTHORITY: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 34, each inclusive, and as attached as Exhibit A hereto, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 8, 2013 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in the Code, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the City or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not to exceed one year, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all such sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided in the Code, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits, or as otherwise permitted by law. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 8, 2013, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its adoption by the City Council. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 5 th day of March, 2013. 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Hiram, as set out in Ga. Laws 2013, Act No. 93 (H.B. 457), approved April 30, 2013. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 
State Law reference— Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.1. - Incorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the charter of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and is intended to replace all prior charters of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The City of Hiram, Georgia, in Paulding County, and the inhabitants thereof, are reconstituted and reincorporated as a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the "City of Hiram" and by that name shall have perpetual succession. References in this charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Hiram, Georgia. With adoption of this Act and its corresponding charter, the City of Hiram is made responsible as a body politic and corporate for all legal undertakings, liabilities, and debts of the predecessor City of Hiram and is vested with any and all property interests possessed by the predecessor City of Hiram. 
Section 1.2. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Hiram, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city may provide by ordinance for the redrawing of any such map or for the revision of any written description to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.3. - Municipal powers. 
(a)  The city shall have all powers possible for a municipality to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this act and charter. The city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this act or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. Such powers shall include, but are not limited to, the following, and also include the power to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this subsection: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order and to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing, and building trades except as prohibited by general law; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future public use and as deemed necessary by the city council to further a public purpose as defined under and utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city, provided that such provisions shall not impede the rights related to lawfully possessed firearms; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of storm water and establishment of a storm water utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage collection and disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; to levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, rubbish, refuse collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges, taxes, or fees; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, or prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, or safety of the inhabitants of the city, provided that such provisions shall not impede the rights related to lawfully possessed firearms, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any public purpose which provides a benefit to the city or enhances the general welfare of its inhabitants on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation within the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards, 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law; and to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county correctional institutions or county jail or county detention center by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city in accordance with general state law and any duly authorized ordinance of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of the same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix-the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulations and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads within the corporate limits of the city and on property within the corporate limits of the city with a view thereof; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and, to the extent not contrary to state law, to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers, to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores to certain areas; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes; other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants, provided that such provisions shall not impede the rights related to lawfully possessed firearms; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.4. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.1. - Establishment of city council; election and terms; oaths. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in a manner as provided under state law. The mayor and council members shall be elected at large from council posts designated as Post 1, Post 2, Post 3, Post 4, and Post 5. The mayor shall be considered a council member for all purposes, except as his or her powers are restricted elsewhere in this charter. All references in city ordinances to the "mayor and council" or "governing authority" shall be construed to mean the "city council" as referred to in this charter. 
(b)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(c)  There shall be elected the mayor and two council members at one election and at every other election thereafter which shall be held according to the sequence presently in place in the city. The remaining council member seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. 
(d)  The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The term of office of each member of the city council shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member unless general law authorizes or requires the term to begin at the first organizational meeting in January or upon some other date. 
(e)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election, be at least twenty-one (21) years of age at the time of election, and be a qualified voter of the city. Each person elected shall continue to reside in the city during that member's period of service, and he or she shall continue to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city throughout the term of office. 
(f)  The mayor and each council member shall be installed in office by taking and subscribing the following oath: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge the duties devolved upon me as mayor and/or council member of the City of Hiram, Georgia; that I will faithfully execute and enforce the laws of the City of Hiram to the best of my ability, skill, and knowledge; and that I will do all in my power to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Hiram and common interest thereof." The mayor and each council member shall also take all other oaths as required by the laws of the State of Georgia. All oaths of office or other oaths required to be taken by the mayor or a council member shall be administered by the mayor, city attorney, city clerk, the municipal judge or judges of the city, the judge of the probate court of Paulding County, Georgia, or any other person allowed by the laws of the State of Georgia to administer such oaths. 
(g)  The salary of the mayor and each council member shall be as established from time to time by home rule ordinance and in accordance with all other State law provisions. 
Section 2.2. - Meetings of the city council; quorum; procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall have full power to fix the time, place, and rules of procedure for their regular sessions and any other meetings called. The regular meetings shall be held at such time and place as prescribed by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such ordinances, resolutions, and regulations as it may deem proper not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Three council members, excluding the mayor, shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this charter and so long as a quorum exists, the affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(d)  No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the city council for official action except when such council member has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. 
(e)  Acts of the city council that will have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. A copy of proposed ordinances shall be maintained for public inspection by the city clerk. 
(f)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member at a regular or special meeting of the city council. An ordinance may be adopted at its meeting of introduction or may be deferred for further consideration. 
(g)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor for signature. 
(h)  Except where in direct conflict with the provisions of this act, the charter, or the law, all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations now in force in the city shall remain in full force and effect unless and until repealed or superseded by other ordinances, resolutions, and regulations adopted by the city council or as otherwise permitted by this act and the charter. 
Section 2.3. - The office of mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief elected officer of the city and as such shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To preside at all meetings of the city council and be recognized as the official head and spokesperson of the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(2)  To vote on matters before the city council only in case of a tie; 
(3)  To sign timely, for and on behalf of the city, all contracts, ordinances, instruments, and other documents authorized by the city council and which are required to be in writing, unless otherwise directed or authorized by the city council; 
(4)  To administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(5)  To fulfill such other duties as authorized by the city council. 
(b)  Annually at the first meeting of the new calendar year, the city council shall elect one of the council members to serve as the mayor pro tempore who shall, in the absence of the mayor, perform the duties and exercise all the rights, power, and privileges of the office of the mayor in accordance with this charter. 
Section 2.4. - Vacancies; filling vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the death, resignation, removal from office, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  If less than 12 months remains in the unexpired term, a vacancy in the office of council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment of any citizen of the city eligible to hold such office by vote of the majority of the remaining members of the city council. The person appointed shall then serve until the next regular council member election at which time, as a part of that election, a person shall be elected to fill the vacated post. If such vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election, as provided for in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A., or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted governing municipal elections. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the council member as may be permitted now or hereafter by this charter or the laws of the city or the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Should a mayoral vacancy occur within 12 months preceding the expiration of the mayor's term of office, then the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor pro tempore or by any council member appointed for that purpose whereupon the position of mayor shall be filled until the next mayoral election at which time a person shall be elected to the office of mayor as generally provided by the charter and pursuant to all applicable law. If such a vacancy occurs 12 months or more prior to the expiration of the term of that office, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a special election in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A, or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted governing municipal elections. This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor as may be permitted now or hereafter by this charter or the laws of the city or the State of Georgia. 
Section 2.5. - City manager. 
(a)  The city council shall, by majority vote of its members, appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall set his or her compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications, including relevant experience. In lieu of appointment for an indefinite term, the city council is authorized, but not required, to enter into an employment contract with the city manager for a term of no more than four years. Any such contract shall contain as an essential term the express right of the city council to terminate the city manager's employment at any time for any reason not prohibited by law or for no reason whatsoever. Such contract may provide for payment of up to six months' severance pay at the city manager's then current rate of compensation if termination is not made on the basis of grounds specified in the contract that would void entitlement to severance. Under no circumstances shall any contractual entitlement to severance pay be deemed a right to continued employment as city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs entrusted to the position by or under this charter. The city manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To appoint all department heads, subject to the approval of the city council, and otherwise to appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all other city employees and administrative officers, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  To attend all city council meetings and have the right to take part in discussion, but not vote; 
(4)  To see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  To prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council. Once approved for the following fiscal year, any increase in the appropriations for these budgets, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments, shall require the approval of the city council. Such amendment shall be adopted by ordinance or resolution; 
(6)  To submit a quarterly summary of the finances and administrative activities of the city to the city council, and to make available to the city council and public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  To prescribe, require, publish, and implement standards of administrative management and operating procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the city which are subject to the city manager's supervision; 
(8)  To act as the purchasing agent of the city; 
(9)  To make such other studies, reports, and investigations as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(10)  To keep the city council fully advised as to the future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable; and 
(11)  To perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
(c)  The city manager shall have full authority to execute the city's annual operating budget and capital budget. Establishment of all special funds and authorization of expenditures from the special funds shall require approval of the city council. The city council shall also approve any operating or capital budget amendments requiring use of funds from the contingency special fund. 
(d)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the mayor and council members shall not give orders or directions to any city employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(e)  The city council may remove the city manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Because the city manager serves at the will of the city council, the city council may terminate or suspend the city manager at any time, with or without cause, through the adoption of a preliminary resolution with the affirmative vote of a majority of its members. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the city manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the city manager, he or she may file a written request for a public hearing with the city council. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The city manager may file a written reply not later than five days before the hearing with the city council; 
(3)  If the city manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the city manager has requested a public hearing, the city council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing; and 
(4)  The city manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. In those instances in which the city council has exercised its discretion and entered into an employment contract with the city manager that provides for severance pay under certain conditions, termination may result in payment of severance pay in accordance with the contract terms. 
(f)  By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return. 
(g)  Upon removal or vacancy or prior to the time the city council appoints a city manager upon absence or disability, the city council shall appoint a temporary city manager by majority vote of its members. 
Section 2.6. - Other city officers; administrative personnel. 
(a)  The following positions are re-established by this charter to be filled by persons appointed by the city council: city clerk and city attorney. The following positions are re-established by this charter to be filled by persons appointed as provided in this charter by the city manager: city operations director and police chief. Those selected for these positions shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications, including relevant experience. The city council shall prescribe the compensation to be provided for the services to be rendered by these positions. Those selected to fill these positions shall execute the duties and responsibilities entrusted to them by the position held and as required by this charter any ordinance, resolution, or directive of the city council or the city manager, and as required by applicable state and federal law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council shall have the authority to establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as deemed necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(c)  Except as otherwise permitted by this charter and only pursuant to an agreement in writing executed by the city, the persons appointed to non-elective positions pursuant to this charter or otherwise employed by the city shall serve in an at-will capacity and are subject to removal or suspension at any time unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance, or an agreement in writing executed by the city. 
Section 2.7. - Boards; commissions; authorities. 
(a)  The city council is empowered to establish by ordinance any boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems appropriate, and shall establish by ordinance the composition, period of existence, and duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities established by the city council shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating the person to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of a board, commission, or authority serve at-will and may be removed at any time by a vote of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. As it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
ARTICLE III. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 3.1. - Municipal court re-established. 
With this charter, the municipal court of the City of Hiram is re-established. 
Section 3.2. - Municipal court jurisdiction; authority; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 180 days, or both, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. The municipal court shall have the authority to issue search warrants as provided by law. 
(h)  The municipal court judge shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and the municipal court judge shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the city granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, including such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
Section 3.3. - Municipal court chief judge and associate judges; designation of stand-by judges; oath. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time and full-time judges as deemed appropriate by the chief judge and approved, by ordinance, by the city council as provided for in this section. There is also hereby established the position of stand-by judge. The position of stand-by judge is established to provide one or more judges who will serve as a municipal court judge where, due to a conflict, absence, or other reason the chief judge and/or such other part-time or full-time judge then utilized by the city is unable to serve on a scheduled court date or in those instances where the chief judge determines that the matters to be heard or otherwise handled by the municipal court make use of an additional judge appropriate for a designated court date or series of dates. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a municipal court judge unless that person has attained the age of 21 years, is a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and possesses all qualifications required by law to serve as a municipal court judge. The chief judge and any additional part-time or full-time judges shall be appointed annually by the city council and may only be removed from office for cause prior to the end of an annual appointment. 
(c)  Commencing within 60 days of adoption of this ordinance and, thereafter, at the first regular session of the city council in each calendar year, the chief judge shall provide to the city council the names of those proposed by the chief judge for service as stand-by judges. Stand-by judges are subject to the same qualification and eligibility criteria of all other municipal court judges. By resolution the city council shall appoint one or more stand-by judges either from the list of those proposed by the chief judge or otherwise proposed. Consistent with the purposes for establishment of stand-by judges, the chief judge may, within his discretion, call upon one or more of the stand-by judges to serve. Any person appointed as a stand-by judge by resolution of the city council may only be removed from office for cause prior to the end of an annual appointment. 
(d)  Compensation of chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, the chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges shall take an oath, given by the mayor, attesting that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of the person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 7-1-2014) 
Section 3.4. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as established and publicized by the court. 
Section 3.5. - Appeals. 
The right of certiorari from the decisions and judgments of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Paulding County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 3.6. - Rules of court. 
With the approval of the city council, the municipal court judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, such rules shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Rules for Municipal Courts adopted by the Georgia Supreme Court. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 

Section 4.1. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the "Georgia Election Code," Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 4.2. - General elections; timing. 
There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
Section 4.3. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 4.4. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Section 4.5. - Other election provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
Section 4.6. - Removal from office. 
(a)  Removal of an elected official of the city shall be governed by this section except as otherwise provided by this charter or required by state or federal law. 
(b)  Removal from office is required for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Removal of an officer pursuant to this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following an evidentiary hearing by the city. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city Council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Paulding County. Such appeal shall be governed by the rules governing appeals to the superior court by writ of certiorari; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Paulding County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Hiram. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

Section 5.1. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. The purpose of such tax shall be to raise revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government or of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 5.2. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
By ordinance, the city council shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. By ordinance, the city council may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 5.3. - Occupation and business taxes. 
By ordinance, the city council shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not prohibited by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 5.9 of this charter. 
Section 5.4. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
By ordinance, the city council shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 5.9 of this charter. 
Section 5.5. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys to railroad companies, street railway companies, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, solid waste disposal companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys to railroad companies, street railway companies, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Section 5.6. - Service charges. 
By ordinance, the city council shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5.9 of this charter. 
Section 5.7. - Special assessments. 
By ordinance, the city council shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, storm sewers, drainage facilities, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5.9 of this charter. 
Section 5.8. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 5.9. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
By ordinance, the city council may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. All taxes and assessments levied pursuant to this charter shall constitute a lien on the property subject to the tax or assessment, which lien shall rank with liens for property taxes. The city council may provide by ordinance for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fieri facias (fi. fas.); making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees: and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 5.10. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 5.11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 5.12. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 5.13. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the city at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 5.14. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Section 5.15. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council may provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Section 5.16. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 5.17. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; provided, however, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of each fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Section 5.18. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
Section 5.19. - Changes in appropriations. 
By ordinance, the city council may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 5.20. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget, with or without amendments. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget or the expenditure is necessary to meet needs in a public emergency as provided in this charter. 
(b)  By ordinance, the city council shall adopt the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 5.21. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 5.22. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing and: 
(1)  Signed by the mayor after being authorized by the city council and such authorization entered in the city council journal of proceedings; or 
(2)  Is a contract wherein the value of the city's obligation does not exceed $5,000.00, is for an authorized budgeted expenditure, and is signed by the city manager in compliance with such other restrictions upon his or her authority as the city council shall impose by ordinance. 
Section 5.23. - Purchasing. 
By ordinance, the city council may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 5.24. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 6.1. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 6.2. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations in force in the city on the effective date of this charter and not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 6.3. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 6.4. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Hiram Code" or the "City Code." 
(Code 1996, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing authority: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
City or municipality. The term "city" or "municipality" means the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Hiram. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" is used, it means Paulding County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Governing authority, city council, mayor and council, governing body. Whenever the term "governing authority," "city council," "council," "mayor and council," or "governing body" is used, it means the governing body of the City of Hiram. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Hiram" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the governing authority, an official copy of which is maintained in the city offices where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" is used, it refers to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city, unless otherwise provided. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing authority that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the governing authority. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Hiram, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis or at such other frequency as directed by the governing authority. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the governing authority during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1996, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1996, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures for any city officer or city employee; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing for subdivision regulations; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; 
(16)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(17)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; and 
(19)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1996, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, or a violation by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not to exceed 60 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(e)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13. - Interpretation of Code. 
In all interpretations of this Code, and ordinances, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the governing authority, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-14. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the governing authority, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the governing authority, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the governing authority, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the governing authority by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III; municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Polling place. 
The polling place for elections held in the city shall be as established by the governing authority, from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Polling places to be selected by governing authority of municipality, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265. 
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
The city's fiscal year shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3; meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 

Sec. 2-23. - Meetings. 
(a)  The governing authority shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise changed and ordered by the governing authority. 
(b)  Meetings shall be held at the Hiram Community Center, 219 Main St., Hiram, Georgia, unless otherwise changed pursuant to the Open Meetings Act. 
(Code 1996, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-24. - Rules of procedure. 
The proceedings of the governing authority shall be generally governed by rules established by that body from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 2-32) 
Secs. 2-25—2-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for public officials and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-53. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the city that its officials, employees, appointees, and volunteers conducting official city business: 
(1)  Serve others and not themselves; 
(2)  Be independent, impartial and responsible; 
(3)  Use resources with efficiency and economy; 
(4)  Treat all people fairly; 
(5)  Use the power of their position for the well-being of their constituents; and 
(6)  Create an environment of honesty, openness and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.1, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-54. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the governing authority, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the governing authority as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the governing authority. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the city and the board of ethics containing specific allegations of misconduct by a city official; provided, however, such allegations must be files within six months after the complaining party knew or should have reasonably known of the alleged misconduct, provided no complaint shall be filed later than 12 months after the conduct complained of. 
Confidential information means any information which by law or practice is not available to the public. 
Consultant means any person not a city official and who is not an employee of the city who is retained to render personal services of a technical or professional nature, whether paid or unpaid, and who has other personal or private employment. The term "consultant" includes, but is not limited to, attorneys, architects, engineers, surveyors and accountants. 
Employee means any person who is a fulltime or parttime employee of the city. 
Gift means any benefit or thing of value which is conveyed to or performed for the benefit of a public servant or a partner in interest, including any advance, award, contract, contribution, deposit, employment, favor, forbearance, gift, gratuity, honorarium, loan, payment, service, subscription, or the promise that any of these things or acts of value will be conferred in the future, if such thing or act of value is conferred or performed without the lawful exchange of consideration which is at least equal in value to the thing or act conferred or performed. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage includes in-laws. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest, held by or accruing to a city official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A city official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person is in the city official's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the city official may receive any payment or other benefit unless the city official is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the city official had paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the city official is a director, officer, employee or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the city official is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 23 months either equal or exceed: 
a.  $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services; or 
b.  Ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the governing authority; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.2, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-55. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  City officials shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has or is seeking to obtain contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  Seeks in exchange for the thing of value to have a city official exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; or 
(3)  Seeks in exchange for the thing of value to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the city official. 
(b)  City officials shall not directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if: 
(1)  It could reasonably be considered to influence the city official in the future or if the city official is involved in any official act or action which results in a monetary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large; or 
(2)  The city official recently has been, or is now, or within six months in the future, is involved in any official act or action which results in a monetary benefit for the donor or lender which is not available to the public at large. 
(c)  The prohibitions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  Occasional nonmonetary gift of insignificance or trinkets or gifts such as a calendar, memento or pen received in the normal course of business with a value of/or less than $100.00 and/or admission to and/or consumption of food and/or beverage at a meal, function, social setting or event; 
(2)  Award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  Transaction authorized by and performed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6 as now or hereafter amended; 
(4)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
(5)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia laws; 
(6)  Items listed under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2 that are specifically itemized as "a thing of value shall not include" as now or hereafter amended; or 
(7)  Food, beverage or expenses afforded city official, members of their families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions or activities. 
(d)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(e)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the governing authority or other city body. 
(f)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a city official or with a business in which a city official has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(2)  The professional activities of the city attorney in his work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(3)  An otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city clerk or a chief of police). 
(4)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. 
(5)  Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
(6)  Contracts for services which are awarded pursuant to sealed competitive bids subsequent to an advertised competitive bid process in accordance with the purchasing ordinance of the city. 
(7)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation, provided that a written record explaining the emergency is prepared by the mayor and thereafter kept on file. 
(g)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the governing authority and shall recuse himself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  No city official, in any matter before the governing authority or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the municipal court nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the city on any matter pending before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.3, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-56. - Coercion by city official; improper use of office. 
(a)  A city official shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official shall not use his position to coerce, request, or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do work on behalf of his social, church or fraternal interests without paying just compensation; 
(2)  Do work on behalf of a member of the family of the city official without paying just compensation; 
(3)  Purchase goods and/or services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
(4)  Work for him personally or in his private business without paying just compensation. 
(c)  A city official shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial or in kind benefit to him or persons that are a member of the family of the city official, or those with whom a city official has a financial interest, direct contractual interest or employment interest. 
(d)  A city official shall not intentionally use the office or official title or position for the city official's own financial interest or the financial gain of another that is applicable to the city official. The performance of usual and customary constituent services, without additional compensation, does not constitute the improper use of office prohibited by this section. 
(e)  No city official shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, discriminate against, or give the appearance of or attempt to intimidate, threaten, coerce or discriminate against any employee for the purpose of interfering with that person's freedom of choice on the regular discharge of his official duties. 
(f)  No city official shall improperly influence any other city official to violate the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this ethics code. 
(g)  No city official shall create a hostile work environment toward an employee as defined under federal law. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.4, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-57. - Elections. 
No city official shall direct any person employed by the city to undertake political activity on behalf of that city official, any other city official or any other individual or political party or group or business organization, during such time that the city employee is required to conduct city business. This section does not prohibit incidental telephone calls made for the purpose of scheduling a city official's daily city business. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.5, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-58. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the governing authority prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.7, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-59. - Board of ethics—Members. 
(a)  The city board of ethics shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the councilmembers, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the councilmembers. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  Each person appointed to the board of ethics shall serve a two-year term that is concurrent with every other member. A member of the board of ethics is eligible for reappointment upon expiration of his or her two-year term provided he or she satisfies all other requirements prescribed by section 2-59, provided, however, that no board member is eligible to serve more than two consecutive two-year appointments to the board of ethics. Any person who has served two consecutive two-year appointments to the board of ethics is ineligible to serve again on the board of ethics any earlier than three years after having completed the two-year appointments. Likewise, no person is eligible to serve pursuant to subsection 2-59(k) having previously served two consecutive two-term board appointments unless a minimum of three years have passed since having completed such service. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The member of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically and mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. Further, for a period of four years after having last served as a member of the city's governing authority is ineligible for appointment to or to otherwise serve on the board of ethics. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(k)  If a position on the board of ethics becomes vacant as a result of death, resignation, removal, incapacity, or any other reason, then that position shall be filled by appointment as prescribed in subsection 2-59(a). The person so appointed must satisfy all of the requirements for service on the board of ethics as prescribed in section 2-59 and shall be appointed to complete the unexpired term of the vacant position. Upon completion of the unexpired term, the appointed individual is eligible for reappointment provided that all requirements prescribed in section 2-59 for service on the board of ethics are satisfied. These provisions concerning a vacant position on the board of ethics also apply to a temporary vacancy defined as an inability to execute the duties of a member of the board of ethics for a period of 60 days or more. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.8, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 2013-6, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 2016-04, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 2-60. - Same—Duties and powers. 
The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers upon receipt of a written complaint by any citizen or duly licensed business owner in the city signed and sworn with the city clerk alleging a violation of this section: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and the conduct of its affairs. 
(2)  To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation and application of this section to any city resident, duly licensed business, and/or city official who seeks, in writing, advice as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the standards imposed in this section or other applicable ethical standards. Such opinions shall be binding on the board of ethics in any subsequent complaint concerning the person who sought the opinion and acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion. If no such advisory opinion is rendered within 60 days of the request for such opinion, the board may not consider any complaint which is filed as a result of the action for which the advisory opinion was sought. 
(3)  To require additional information from a complainant, where appropriate, have subpoena powers and to recommend dismissal and rejection of such complaints as may seem unjustified, frivolous, or patently unfounded; provided, however, that the recommended rejection of a complaint by such board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any right of action the complainant might otherwise have at law or equity against the party complained against. 
(4)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to that transaction and shall prevent refiling of a complaint arising out of the same incident for at least six months. 
(5)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosures required in this division and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this section. 
(6)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division. 
(7)  To mail a copy of the complaint, certified return receipt requested, to the city official against whom the complaint is made. 
(8)  To make such investigations in response to complaints as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated or is about to violate any provisions of this division. 
(9)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems necessary to investigate a complaint. In all proceedings before the board of ethics under this chapter, the burden of proof shall be on the complaining party. In all proceedings under this section occurring after a preliminary investigation as described in this section, the procedures and rules of evidence applicable in civil cases shall apply and the standard of proof required shall be beyond a reasonable doubt in hearings before the board of ethics. 
(10)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate by the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.9, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 2-61. - Penalty and appeals. 
(a)  Any city official who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided for in this section shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  The board of ethics, as a result of a complaint filed with the board of ethics by any resident of the city, or by a group of residents of the city, may make such investigation as it deems proper to carry out its duties under this subsection. For the purpose of such investigation, the board of ethics may hold and conduct hearings, examine witnesses and administer oaths and issue subpoenas when such subpoena power is authorized by law. All testimony taken by the board of ethics shall be under oath. The board of ethics shall apply to the superior court of the county for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. 
(c)  At any hearing held under subsection (b) of this section, the city official who is adversely affected shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses in opposition or extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 10-140, § 2-3.10, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 2-81. - Prosecuting attorney. 
(a)  The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the city in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by state law. The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. The prosecuting attorney shall be a part time position. Any person appointed as the city prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the state bar and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(b)  The city prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as Prosecuting Attorney of the City of Hiram." 
(c)  The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall also execute any other oaths required by law. 
(d)  The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall serve a term of office as designated in writing by the governing authority at the time of appointment and shall be compensated as determined by the governing authority as of the time of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1(2-41), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 2-82. - Indigent public defender. 
(a)  The office of indigent public defender of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation to indigents accused of ordinance violations of city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by state law and punishable by confinement, probation, or other loss of liberty, or by imposition of any fine, fee, or cost enforceable by confinement, probation or other loss of liberty as authorized by general law or municipal ordinance. The indigent public defender shall provide representation to those indigents accused of violations of city ordinances or state law addressable by the municipal court and representation shall be compliant at all times with the applicable standards adopted by the Georgia Public Defenders Standards Council for the Representation of Indigent Persons. The indigent public defender shall be a part time position. Any person appointed as the indigent public defender shall be a member in good standing of the state bar and admitted to practice before the Trial and appellate courts of this state. 
(b)  The indigent public defender shall execute any oaths required by law. 
(c)  The indigent public defender shall serve a term of office as designated in writing by the governing authority at the time of appointment and shall be compensated as determined by the governing authority as of the time of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1(2-42), 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 2-83—2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL 

Sec. 2-111. - Antinepotism. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Personnel actions includes, but are not limited to, promotions, pay raises, transfers, duty assignments, and disciplinary matters. 
Relative includes spouse, child, stepchild, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew or the spouse of any of them. These relationships include those arising from adoption. Persons who are common law married or who are living together without the benefit of matrimony are also considered as relatives under the intent of this rule. 
(b)  Relatives of elected officials and department directors. Relatives of elected officials, department directors appointed by the mayor, the city attorney, the judge of the municipal court, the city marshal-management assistant, and members of special boards or commissions authorized by statute, Charter, or ordinance and appointed by the governing authority are excluded from employment in any department in the city. 
(c)  Relatives of department heads, supervisors. No relative of a city employee shall be employed if such employment would cause one of the following situations to exist: 
(1)  Where one relative would be directly or indirectly supervising another relative; or 
(2)  Where one relative would occupy a position which could be viewed as having a direct or indirect influence over the terms and conditions of the other relative's employment, such as work assignments, promotions, transfers, salary administration, disciplinary matters, or other related management or personnel considerations. 
(d)  Relatives of nonsupervisory employees. Except as otherwise provided herein, relatives of nonsupervisory employees may be employed by the city in any position for which they are qualified. 
(e)  Employee transfers. The limitations regarding the employment of relatives specified in this section also apply to the transfer of an employee into a department where supervisory relatives are employed. 
(f)  Employees who become related subsequent to employment. The limitations on employment of relatives specified in this section shall apply to the continued employment of persons who become relatives subsequent to their employment by the city due to their getting married to each other. If an appropriate transfer cannot be arranged, the less senior employee will be terminated. 
(g)  Fraternization discouraged; prohibited. 
(1)  Fraternization between employees is discouraged as having a high possibility of undesirable consequences or ramifications for both the employees involved and the city, including but not limited to perceived sexual harassment. 
(2)  Fraternization between a department head or supervisor and an employee who he directly or indirectly supervises is expressly prohibited. 
(h)  Application to transfers, promotions, etc. This section shall apply with equal force to transfers, promotions, or any other personnel action causing one of the situations described in subsection (c) or (g)(2) of this section to exist. 
(i)  Nepotism, fraternization arising or discovered during employment. 
(1)  In the event a violation of subsection (b) of this section arises during employment, the affected/existing employee shall submit his resignation within 30 calendar days of such event. If no resignation is forthcoming, the affected employee will be discharged. 
(2)  In the event a violation of subsection (c) or (g)(2) of this section arises during employment, one of the affected employees shall submit his resignation or apply for a transfer within 30 calendar days of such event. If no resignation is forthcoming and no application for transfer is made (or if said application is denied), the employee hired last will be discharged. 
(3)  Violations of subsections (b), (c), and (g)(2) of this section shall be immediately disclosed. The failure to do so shall be cause for disciplinary action against the affected employee, up to and including discharge. 
(Code 1996, § 2-3; Ord. No. 2012-1, 1-4-2012) 
Chapter 4 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement professional and an expert in economic development, both of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, at the governing authority's hearing on January 30, 2007; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before the governing authority on other occasions including the public hearing and meeting of the governing authority conducted on January 30, 2007, and on documentary evidence and the study submitted to the governing authority by Johnny Shirley, chief of police takes note of the well-known and self evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
(b)  It is the finding of the governing authority that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment, (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
(c)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or video graphic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The governing authority finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
(d)  Furthermore, it is the finding of the governing authority that other forms of adult entertainment, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(e)  The governing authority finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the city are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells video tapes depicting sexual activities. In addition, the city has investigated the county's experience with the adult bookstore located within the county which revealed that a substantial amount of activity at a bookstore located within that county involved booths which an individual could enter, view videos depicting sexual activity, and sexually interact with a bookstore patron in an adjoining booth through a hole strategically placed in the wall of adjoining booths. 
(f)  The governing authority therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the governing authority finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The governing authority finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-1, 1-30-2007) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the book mentioned herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. For purposes of this section, the term "adult entertainers" includes employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Adult entertainment establishment includes the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, as defined herein, or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult minimotion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
The term "adult entertainment establishment" does not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this article, the term "children's day care facility" includes, but not be limited to, the term "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten, "play school," or "preschool." 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified anatomical areas includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the tope of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-2, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-2, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-3. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the incorporated area of the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided in section 4-5(d) when the city manager fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this article. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine. 
(b)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $750.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city manager within ten days after the city manager approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. 
(c)  All license granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the city manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this article will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-3, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-3, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-4. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-4, 1-30-2007) 
Sec. 4-5. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the incorporated areas of the city shall make an annual application to the city manager. Such annual application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name of the operator as defined herein and all owners as defined herein. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making an annual application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting each such annual application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $300.00 shall be paid to the city manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city manager shall issue a receipt showing that such annual application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging, in conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator and all owners; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator and all owners; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator and all owners, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator and all owners, are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator and owner for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator and the owner, all convictions (excluding offenses which are traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the permits unit of the city police department; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant, the operator and each owner; 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator and owner from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator or owner and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator and owner, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by if application is made on behalf of: 
a.  An individual, the individual; 
b.  A partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  A corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  Any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the city manager and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the governing authority, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator and owner. The city manager shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The city manager shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be accepted and/or granted if the city manager finds: 
(1)  The required investigative fee has been paid in an amount as established by the governing authority from time to time; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor the operator or owner has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of the term "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor the operator or owner has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator as defined herein on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this article from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this article or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the city, the state or the United States. 
The city manager shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-5, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-5, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-6. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  Location. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land that falls within any of the following zoning districts: 
a.  A-1 (agricultural); R-2 (suburban residential); 
b.  R-2 (suburban residential with sewer); 
c.  R-4 (multifamily residential); 
d.  R-5 (duplex); 
e.  R-6 (manufactured home park); 
f.  R-7 (multifamily fee simple (non-rental)); 
g.  D (planned residential development with public sewer and water). 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land on which a church, school, college campus, public park, children's day care facility or the Silver Comet Trail is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine is located; 
(4)  In any zoning district other than a B-2 (highway business) with a special use permit; or 
(5)  Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
For purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest points on the property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employees employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 4-5(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) of this article within five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainment establishment employee who is convicted of any such crimes while employed at an adult entertainment establishment shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" means the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this article operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Permit for employment. Before any person may work as an adult entertainment establishment employee on a licensed premises, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, he shall file a notice with the city police permits unit of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city police permits unit and shall receive a permit for such employment from the city police permits unit. The prospective employee shall supply a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the city police department. The prospective employee shall also provide a list of all of his convictions of offenses described in section 4-5(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) within the past five years. The city police permits unit shall approve or deny the permit within 15 days of the application. If the prospective employee is found to meet the requirements of this subsection, and upon payment of the permit fee, the city police department shall issue a permit approving such employment within 48 hours. Upon receipt of a permit, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the city police department shall provide the prospective employee the reasons for the denial and the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the governing authority which shall uphold or reverse the decision within 30 days of such appeal. If the police permits unit does not approve or deny an application for a license within 45 days of the date such application was received by the city police permits unit, then on the expiration of the 45th day: 
a.  The application shall be approved and the city police permits unit shall immediately issue the license for which application was made; and 
b.  The applicant shall have the right to begin operating in the manner allowed by the license for which application was made. 
The annual permit fee shall be $25.00. 
(3)  Suspension/revocation of permit; procedure. Violation by an adult entertainment establishment employee of the provisions of this article and/or conviction of an offense described in section 4-5(d)(3) (including pleas of nolo contendere) of this article shall subject an adult entertainer to suspension or revocation of the permit for employment. Whenever the city manager finds that reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit for employment issued hereunder, the city manager shall schedule a hearing before the governing authority to consider such action and shall notify the employee at least 20 days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing and the proposed action and grounds therefore. The employee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine witnesses with or without legal counsel. The city manager shall make his decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the employee promptly in writing. In the event that a permit for employment is suspended or revoked by the city manager, a $50.00 appeal cost shall be assessed against the permit holder. Any employee whose permit for employment has been suspended or revoked by the city manager may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of such revocation or suspension. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors working as adult entertainment establishment employees shall be considered as employees and shall be required to satisfy the provisions of this article relating to employees of adult entertainment establishments, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(d)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this article. 
(e)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(f)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to a 25-watt clear glass electric light bulb per square foot. 
(g)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this article shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-6, 1-30-2007) 
Sec. 4-7. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employee or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Sale, consumption of alcohol. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or permit the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or controlled substance upon the licensed premises. 
(d)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(e)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-7, 1-30-2007) 
Sec. 4-8. - Penalty for violation and disclosure of lines of business. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and punished according to the general penalties described in the general provisions in section 1-12. Each day of operation in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Any business or person who is required to pay occupational tax as defined by section 12-18, and any business or person who is required to register and identify with the city clerk each line of business that such business conducts as required by section 12-22 shall also be required to file, in writing, within 30 days of beginning any business within the city limits an additional registration with the city clerk which accurately, truthfully and completely identifies any and all lines of business that such business conducts and the exact location of such business. Such registration must also be filed with the city clerk yearly by any such business or person on or before March 1 of each consecutive year thereafter. Any such changes to the location of such business or any such changes or additions to the lines of business which each such business conducts, must also be registered with the city clerk as an amendment in writing to such registration within 30 days of any such changes or additions. The failure to file such registration/registrations or amendments in a timely manner and/or the failure to accurately, completely and truthfully file such registration/registrations or amendments and the failure to accurately, completely and truthfully disclose any information required by this chapter by any person or business are violations of this chapter. 
(1)  These requirements of this subsection are to provide the governing authority and the city police department with a means of determining whether or not such business is required to also obtain a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment and to truthfully, accurately and completely disclose all information in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  For any violation of this chapter, the city shall have the right to petition the superior court of the county in order to restrain and enjoin any person or business from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on any business within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-8, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 07-20-A, § 19-8, 2-1-2011) 
Sec. 4-9. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance upon the determination and adjudication that such is unlawful and a public nuisance by the superior court of the county or any other court having jurisdiction and venue to determine that such is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-9, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 07-20-A, § 19-9, 2-1-2011) 
Sec. 4-10. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. An inspector designated by the city shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this article and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-10, 1-30-2007) 
Sec. 4-11. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of the city's provisions regulating adult entertainment establishments found in this article. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this article; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator and owner, conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 4-5(d)(3). 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the city manager must make a decision as to whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application. In no event shall the city manager's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city manager shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city manager of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the city manager shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the city manager denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this article may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20 through 9-6-28. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees, or agents pursuant to this article may also seek review of such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of such decision. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the city manager finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the city manager shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The city manager shall make his decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. Any licensee, person, or entity whose license has been suspended or revoked by the city manager may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 days of such decision. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-11, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-1, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-12. - Miscellaneous; automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  Miscellaneous. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(b)  Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. Notice of such forfeiture for nonuse shall be mailed by the city to the licensee shown on the application and license. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, §§ 19-11, 19-12, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-12, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-13. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock or other control-type of view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be lighted by a minimum of a 100-watt clear glass electric light bulb at all times. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-14, 1-30-2007) 
Secs. 4-14—4-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIDEO STORES 

Sec. 4-45. - Regulations. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to Houston, Texas, Tucson, Arizona, Chattanooga, Tennessee, Minneapolis, Minnesota, Dayton, Ohio, and Gwinnett County, Georgia, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on the study submitted to the governing authority by Johnny Shirley, chief of police and based on documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the governing authority's public hearing and regular meeting on January 30, 2007, the governing authority takes note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex to occur at video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films or videos depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the governing authority further notes that persons frequent such video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
(2)  The governing authority finds that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The governing authority therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The governing authority finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in video stores. The governing authority further finds that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Requirements. Any video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the video store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room, or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms, and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the video store is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room, or cubicle when not in use shall be lighted by a minimum of a 100-watt clear glass electric light bulb at all times. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room, or cubicle. 
(c)  Definition of video store. The term "video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five percent or more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" includes adult video stores as defined in section 4-2. 
(d)  Enforcement. The provisions of this section may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The city may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-20, § 19-15, 1-30-2007; Ord. No. 08-37, § 19-15, 4-1-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 7, 2017, repealed Ch. 6 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 6 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-9, 6-37—6-39, 6-67—6-88, 6-110—6-122, 6-137—6-147, 6-166—6-170, 6-191—6-197, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 08-72, adopted Aug. 12, 2008; ; Ord. No. 09-49, § 6-72, adopted June 2, 2009; Ord. of 12-6-2011, § 6-134(a). 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and as may be amended hereafter which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 and as may be amended hereafter which is incorporated herein by reference, for retail consumption on the premises solely in draft form. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to the law of the state. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Registered agent means that individual, who is a resident of the county and at least 21 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon a licensee or owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-2. - Penalties for violation. 
Except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter, any person who violates this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 for each offense and/or up to 60 days incarceration. Should the violation and conviction be of a state law enforceable by municipal court, the punishment shall be by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 and/or up to 12 months incarceration. Violations of this chapter shall be heard by the judge of the municipal court of the city unless by state or federal law, such violation cannot be heard by the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-3. - Purposes of chapter. 
The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state or federal law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(4)  Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-4. - Notice. 
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any required notice may be delivered by hand or posted by certified mail, in which event delivery shall be deemed to take place on the third day following the date of deposit in the U.S. Mail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-5. - Collection of sums due. 
As to any failure to pay any sum due for fees or taxes under this chapter, the city may issue an execution against the violator or the licensee or their property or revoke said license for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax in addition to any other remedies the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-6. - Sale to or purchase or possession by underage person. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for: 
(1)  Consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; or 
(2)  Consumption at a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(4) of this section shall not apply when the parent or guardian of the underage person gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, the person's photograph, and the person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card and as regulated and/or authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104 and as may be amended hereafter which is incorporated herein by reference. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in a licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 6-167. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this Code for any licensee or any agent, officer, or employee of a licensee to fail to check the identification of any patron when selling or otherwise providing any alcoholic beverage, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in such underage person's possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(h)  For purposes of the prohibitions set forth in this section, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(i)  With reference to the prohibitions set forth in this section, if there is a change in a majority of a licensee's owners, partners, or shareholders, the offenses under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; provided, however, a different corporation, partnership, or other association shall be charged with the offenses of the predecessor if a majority of the owners, partners, or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-7. - Carry-out alcoholic beverage unlawful. 
(a)  Except as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4 (removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises), all alcoholic beverages sold or otherwise dispensed for consumption on the licensed premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises, except that any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
It shall be unlawful for the licensee to permit any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages, other than as allowed herein, which are sold for consumption on the premises. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages, other than as allowed herein, from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Every licensed establishment shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
"It is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hiram to take alcoholic beverages out of this establishment, except as allowed by O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4." 
Such sign shall be in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to leave the premises without paying for such alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for customers to gather outside the licensed premises for consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the manager or any employee of a licensed establishment to allow persons to gather outside the licensed premises for consummation of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-8. - Brown-bagging, BYOB prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage in any retail establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed. For purposes of this section, the term "retail establishment" does not include a private hotel room or other similar guestroom or a private club. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-9. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons. 
It is prohibited for any licensee or licensed establishment employee to furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-10—6-36. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - VENDORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation and licensing of alcohol sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-37. - Adherence required. 
Vendors shall also be required to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-38. - Sales and consumption on public property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or consume any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city manager to serve, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages at the city community center or The Events Place. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-39. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section or as otherwise specifically permitted in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises structure. 
(b)  A consumption licensee may sell, serve, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages in a patio/open area type environment if approved by the governing authority to do so. To be approved the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  The patio/open area must be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the licensed premises main structure, in order to prevent customer from leaving the outside area with an alcoholic beverage without the licensee's knowledge. 
(2)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three feet above ground level, although it does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. The structure must be approved by a building inspector designated by the city and the county fire marshal. 
(3)  The only exits from the patio/open area are to be through the licensee's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should sound an alarm when used in order that any unauthorized use shall be known. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention, or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel if such is done in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-40—6-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-67. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispense any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The applicant for a license or permit, for which provision is made in this chapter, shall be subject to all state laws and regulations and to all city ordinances and regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-68. - Retail package licenses. 
(a)  Applicants may apply for one or more of the following type of retail licenses: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license. Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package. 
(2)  Package wine license. Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license. Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
State Law reference— Maximum license fee for package sales of distilled spirits which is required by this ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-50. 
Sec. 6-69. - Retail consumption on the premises licenses. 
(a)  Five classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available but only for those establishments specifically identified in Sections 6-112 through 6-117.2. 
(1)  Full pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink. 
(2)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of wine and/or malt beverages by the drink. 
(3)  Limited pouring license. Retail sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(4)  Brewpub. See subsection 6-1(b). 
(5)  Farm winery tasting room. See section 6-117. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-70. - Wholesale licenses. 
(a)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who does not have a place of business in the city shall be granted a license to distribute such beverages in the city upon application for such license to the administrative division of the city police department, submittal of an annual renewal affidavit, and a statement that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued. Distributors whose principal place of business is a location other than the city shall pay a registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43 as may be amended hereafter which is incorporated herein by reference (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision of this article). 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. The application for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-71. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
(a)  License requirements for resident caterers. 
(1)  Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that permits sales at authorized catered event or function. 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued. The fee for each license shall be as set in section 6-88. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
(1)  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the administrative division of the city police department. The fee for each such permit shall be $50.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by an future amendment or revision thereto). 
(2)  An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or functions. 
(3)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(c)  Limitation on license. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Tax on sales by resident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article III of this chapter. 
(e)  Tax on drinks served by nonresident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article III of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-72. - Nonprofit civic organization temporary permit. 
(a)  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; must be a nonprofit entity recognized as such by the IRS; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed three days, subject to all state and federal laws and ordinances of the city regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than six such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(c)  Each application for such temporary permit shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-73. - Duration of licenses. 
All licenses, except as otherwise indicated, issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar year basis, and all licenses shall expire at 11:59 p.m on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. License fees shall be prorated as follows: New applications received on and between January 1 and June 30 shall be assessed the full license fee. New applications received on and between July 1 and December 31 shall be assessed one-half of the license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-74. - Individual, business or association entities; named licensee. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of the partner or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the stockholder, officer of the corporation, or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises, who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a purely nonprofit civic, fraternal, patriotic, private, or social club or corporation which is organized and conducted in the city solely as a mutual benefit membership group shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter, and the named individual shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  The individual completing and presenting an application for a license, whether for himself, a partnership, a corporation, or a nonprofit organization, shall meet the requirements of this chapter so as to be the named licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-75. - Joint responsibility. 
If a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. If a nonprofit organization, its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-76. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  Every applicant shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and the application shall constitute a certification that the applicant has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or fulltime employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(c)  A licensee must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one year prior to application. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) of this section, a licensee for the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package must have been a resident of a county or municipality in the state, in which the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package is legal, for one year immediately preceding the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No person, including members of a retail dealer licensee's immediate family, shall be issued, nor shall have a beneficial interest in, more than two package distilled spirits licenses issued in this state. 
(f)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the ten years preceding his application of any felony, any offense involving moral turpitude, any sexual-related crime, or any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes, or gambling but excluding any first conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs as long as 12 months has passed since the conviction and his/her sentence has been completed. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. Sentencing as first offender status shall not be considered as a conviction if the sentence was successfully completed without any violation of probation and with no adjudication of guilt ever being entered. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be dismissed without prejudice and the applicant shall be allowed to reapply upon final disposition of any such charge. 
(g)  A licensee shall not have had revoked, within the five years preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(h)  A licensee shall have, and continuously maintain, as a registered agent a resident of the county upon whom may be served any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner. The registered agent must be a resident of at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-77. - Alcohol awareness training certification required. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this article shall present to the city police department current certification of attendance at an approved alcohol awareness training program. Such certification or approved alternative program shall be verified and signed off by the chief of police before issuance of the license. 
(b)  Every person required to obtain a pouring permit shall also complete an approved alcohol awareness training program and provide proof of completion before being issued a pouring permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-78. - Distance from churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No package malt beverage license, package wine license, or consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, public playground, public swimming pool, daycare center or nursery school. 
(b)  No package distilled spirits license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 100 yards of any church building or alcoholic treatment center or which is located within 200 yards of a school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, public playground, public swimming pool, daycare center or nursery school or which is located within 500 yards of another licensed package distilled spirits business. 
(c)  No package license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 200 feet of a private single-family or two-family dwelling in a zoning district that permits single-family and/or two-family dwellings; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a private dwelling located in a zoning district in which alcoholic beverage outlets are authorized and which dwelling is on the same street as the premises for which a package license is applied. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by state law, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure, as determined by the chief of police or his designee, from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; 
(2)  In a straight path of travel by the nearest public sidewalk, street, road, or highway; and 
(3)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, as determined by the chief of police or his designee, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(e)  No application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a current certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcoholic beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this chapter, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(f)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (e) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet the requirements of this section. 
(g)  If the distance requirements of this section are met at the time a license is issued, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the prohibited distance shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the issuance of a new license to a subsequent owner of the property; provided, however, that as to any new license, the prior license must have been lawful and validly issued at the location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application for the new license. 
(h)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings and to such buildings at any other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of the State of Georgia and which are public schools and private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b) as may be amended hereafter which is incorporated herein by reference. The term "school building" includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "church building" as used in this section means the main structure used by any religious organization for purposes of worship. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to permits issued pursuant to section 6-72. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
State Law reference— Sales near churches or schools, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-79. - Application fee. 
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the governing authority, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the governing authority. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-80. - Application; investigation consent. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts as determined by the police chief to be relevant to the requirements of this chapter and further shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners and a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(2)  If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock and a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(3)  The name of any other entity having a financial interest in the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(b)  Each applicant and licensee shall consent to and authorize a fingerprint analysis and investigation. This shall not apply to an applicant for a temporary permit issued pursuant to section 6-72. 
(c)  The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, or proof of ownership of the premises, or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(d)  Each applicant and licensee authorize the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(e)  Separate applications must be made for each location, and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-81. - Procedure for consideration of application; temporary licenses. 
(a)  Applications shall be submitted to the chief of police or his designee for a thorough investigation. The chief of police or his designee shall report his findings to the city manager. Such finding shall include a recommendation as to the qualifications of the applicant. The city manager shall further have the responsibility and authority to request additional information as may be determined to be necessary in order for the city manager to accept the application as complete. 
(b)  A temporary license for a full pouring license, a limited pouring license, package malt beverage license, and package wine license may be issued by the city manager for a period of up to 60 days provided the city manager is satisfied that the applicant substantially complies with the provisions of the applicable ordinances and meets required qualifications and the denial of a temporary license would create undue hardship upon the applicant, such as the closing of an existing business or delaying of the opening of a new business. The applicant shall sign an acknowledgment that the temporary license is a mere accommodation and may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city manager at any time. 
(c)  The fee for issuance of a temporary license shall be set in section 6-88. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-82. - Denial of application. 
(a)  After a hearing, should the city manager deny an application, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager, which shall set forth the reason for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal. 
(b)  An applicant whose application is denied by the city manager may appeal to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal and proceeding as provided in subsection 6-87(c). 
(c)  Any decision by the governing authority denying an application shall be final unless the applicant applies to the superior court of the county by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the governing authority. 
(d)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-83. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. All applications seeking a transfer of a license in any respect shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensed premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license, no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a family member of the licensee or a personal representative of the estate, appointed by the probate court of the county, shall apply to the police department for authorization. The establishment shall then be allowed to continue to operate for a period of 60 days from the date of death, until expiration of the license, or until the approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)  A change in ownership status of the licensed establishment that does not change the actual ownership interest shall be eligible to apply for a transfer of license as provided herein. By way of example, a sole proprietor who decides to incorporate and be the sole shareholder of the new corporation, although in such circumstances information required from a corporation in an original application shall be provided. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring there from in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided, such withdrawal shall not introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business without application for and issuance of a new license. 
(f)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named individual licensee may be permitted by the mayor if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(g)  In the circumstances described in subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager or his designee determines that the change results in a failure to meet requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-84. - Sale or disposition of licensed business; temporary license. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the police chief and city manager. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, the city manager may issue a temporary license as provided in section 6-81 to the successor in interest, if the successor in interest has properly completed an application and paid the appropriate fee. The temporary license shall be valid for up to 60 days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the city, whichever first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-85. - License renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal shall be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the police department stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be filed no later than November 15 and shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in the amount as set by resolution of the governing authority, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the governing authority. 
(c)  Renewal applications and payments not received by November 15 shall incur a late fee. Renewal applications and payments received between November 16 and December 15 are subject to a ten percent late fee. Businesses failing to apply for renewal of their licenses prior to December 15 must reapply for a license. 
(d)  Businesses required to reapply for a license, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, and filing this application for a new license after January 1 shall pay at the time of filing the required application fee, the annual fee, and the ten percent late fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-86. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept in the public area plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-87. - Probation, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation by the city manager for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state or federal laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation, false statement or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(2)  When suspension of a license is permitted under this chapter but no specific period of suspension is mandated, the following guidelines apply: 
a.  First suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 30 days. 
b.  Second suspension in a 12-month period of time shall not exceed 60 days. 
c.  Third suspension in a 12-month period of time shall cause revocation of the license and result in the inability of the licensee to obtain a license from the city for a term of three years from the date of revocation. 
(3)  Prior to the suspension, revocation, or probation of a license by the city manager, the city manager shall give written notice to the licensee of the reason(s) for the contemplated action as well as the time and place to meet with the city manager at which time the licensee shall be given the opportunity to be heard on why the contemplated action should not be taken. Service of such notice shall be by personal service on the registered agent by the police chief or his designee. If personal service upon a registered agent cannot be accomplished or is otherwise unavailable, it shall be sufficient that the written notice be left with the licensee, manager on duty of the establishment or a person otherwise responsible for the establishment or activity. 
(b)  Hearings. 
(1)  The city manager shall hear applications for licenses, as well as all matters relating to such licenses or otherwise under this chapter, including, but not being limited to, suspensions, revocations, transfers, renewals, changes of ownership, and any other matters affecting such licenses. 
(2)  The city manager shall also hear matters relating to the issuance, renewal, suspension, and revocation of pouring permits. 
(3)  Applicants, licensees, or permit holders shall be given written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose when the matter at issue will be heard. The applicant, licensee, or permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Ten days' notice shall be required except in cases of temporary permits being issued pursuant section 6-72, in which cases three days' notice shall be sufficient. 
(4)  Upon close of the meeting, a decision shall be rendered in writing by the city manager and issued no later than within 48 hours of the meeting with the licensee absent the occurrence of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the city manager. 
(c)  An applicant whose application has been denied, or a licensee whose license has been suspended or revoked by the city manager may appeal to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal within five business days of denial. Such notice shall be provided to the city clerk. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next governing authority meeting occurring at least ten days after the notice is received. The governing authority shall be provided a copy of all evidence heard by the city manager, along with a copy of his written decision. The applicant or licensee may make a statement on his or its behalf before the governing authority, but no new evidence shall be taken. A vote on the appeal shall be taken either on the date of appeal hearing or at the next subsequent regular meeting of the governing authority. The decision of the governing authority shall be based on the evidence and standards of this chapter. If the governing authority determines the city manager acted in accordance with the standards of this chapter, it shall affirm his decision. If the governing authority determines the city manager acted contrary to the standards of this chapter, it shall overturn his decision and remand back to the city manager for a corrected decision. 
(d)  An applicant or licensee who is dissatisfied with the decision of the governing authority may appeal by filing for writ of certiorari with the superior court of the county within 30 days of the governing authority's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-88. - Alcohol license fees 
(a)  The following shall be the alcohol license fees as required by the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
Application Fees 
New establishment ..... $100.00 
Renewal with changes ..... 100.00 
Renewal without changes ..... 50.00 
Transfer ..... 100.00 
Temporary license (up to 60 days) ..... 100.00 
Retail Package Licenses 
Package malt beverage license ..... 500.00 
Package wine license ..... 500.00 
Package distilled spirits license (requires, in addition to fee, a $1,000.00 personal performance bond) ..... 1,000.00 
Retail Consumption on Premises Licenses 
Full pouring license (distilled spirits, wine and beer by the drink) ..... 4,500.00 
Limited pouring license (wine by the drink) ..... 1,000.00 
Limited pouring license (malt beverage/beer by the drink) ..... 1,000.00 
Limited pouring license (distilled spirits by the drink) ..... 3,500.00 
Specialty Licenses 
Brewpub ..... 3,000.00 
Farm winery tasting room ..... 3,000.00 
Late Night License ..... 250.00 
Wholesale Licenses 
Resident wholesale dealer license (wine and/or beer) ..... 1,000.00 
Resident wholesale dealer license (distilled spirits) ..... 1,000.00 
Nonresident wholesale dealer registration fee ..... 100.00 
(b)  The following shall be the temporary/special event permits fees as required by the ordinance from which this chapter is derived: 
Alcoholic Beverage Caterers Permit 
Resident caterers license/permit (per event) ..... $25.00 
Nonresident caterers license/permit (per event) ..... 50.00 
Nonprofit Civic Organization Permits 
One-day permit fee ..... 50.00 
Employee Pouring Permits 
Employee pouring permit ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-89—6-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES LICENSES AND LICENSEES 

Sec. 6-110. - Eligibility for license. 
(a)  A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. 
(b)  Full-service kitchen as used in this article shall mean a kitchen with a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and the county fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-111. - Hotel and hotel room service. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a hotel must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests; and 
(3)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  A hotel may grant permission for the operation of a lounge, restaurant, or supper club on its premises; such an operation may be granted a consumption on the premises license if it meets the other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term "hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of this section), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide in-room service of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide in-room service by the state revenue commissioner. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, the term "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guestroom which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales delivered by room service shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(h)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on the retail sale by the drink of alcoholic beverages containing distilled spirits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-112. - Restaurants. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(4)  Have at least 51 percent of its total sales be from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(b)  Brewpubs, as defined in subsection 6-1(b) and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3) which as may be amended hereafter, is incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-113. - Lounges. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room that has a seating capacity, at tables of at least 50 persons and which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor, or in a separate building, from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-114. - Supper clubs. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a supper club must: 
(1)  Have a seating capacity, at tables, of at least 100 persons; 
(2)  Have adequate and sanitary full-service kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its patrons, except that this requirement shall not apply to a supper club which is located in a hotel having separate kitchen facilities of which the supper club makes use; 
(3)  Provide a band or other professional entertainment a minimum of 20 days in each calendar month, each and every calendar month of the calendar year, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(4)  Be arranged and maintained such that all booths and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(5)  Serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(6)  Have at least 51 percent of its total sales the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines; and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-115. - Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of the state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members: 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(4)c. of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Tips or gratuities added to the bills under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations, and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food; provided, however, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
State Law reference— Sale of spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1. 
Sec. 6-116. - Special events facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(1)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; 
(2)  For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including, but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; and 
(3)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; or 
(4)  Be a multi-sport complex situated on at least 20 acres and in conformance with the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-117. - Farm winery tasting room. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the state. 
Special entertainment district means a certain area within the city designated by the governing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 as may be amended hereafter are incorporated herein by reference and are required by this chapter solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(b)  There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a state farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the state and the city. 
(c)  Under this section, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room in the licensed premises. For the purposes of this chapter, upon application, a certain location may be designated by the governing authority as a special entertainment district pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 as may be amended hereafter are incorporated herein by reference thereto and required by this chapter. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
(d)  The farm winery tasting room created by this section is limited to farm wineries licensed by the state and allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. No license is created by this section authorizing any other person to deal in any other alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-117.1. - Golf club. 
(a)  To be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a golf club must: 
(1)  Be a corporation or association organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia and actively in operation within the city prior to submitting an application for a license hereunder; 
(2)  Be a recognized member of the Georgia State Golf Association; 
(3)  Operate at least one 18-hole golf course within its grounds of least a par 70 as determined in accordance with the standards of the Georgia State Golf Association or the United States Golf Association; 
(4)  Operate a restaurant: 
a.  Within an enclosed structure with a full-service kitchen used exclusively for the purpose of preparing and serving meals by staff trained to prepare, cook, and serve meals and other suitable food for patrons; 
b.  With a seating capacity of at least 60 patrons, with "seating capacity" meaning that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals; and 
c.  That prepares and serves meals at least six days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacation and periods of renovation; 
(5)  Have a golf club membership of at least 100 members at the time an application for a license is submitted who have paid a membership fee for family or individual membership; and 
(6)  Employ a full-time management staff responsible for planning and directing the social activities of the golf club, including the management of the areas where food and drink are sold and dispensed. 
(b)  Provided that the foregoing requirements are satisfied and that all other applicable requirements of this section are satisfied, alcoholic beverages dispensed by the golf club to patrons from any location on the premises may be consumed by the patrons anywhere on the premises of the golf club. 
(c)  The notice required by section 6-7 shall be posted prominently at all locations where alcoholic beverages are dispensed and at the exit of each structure from which alcoholic beverages are dispensed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-117.2. - Indoor recreational activity. 
(a)  To be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, an indoor recreation establishment must: 
(1)  Have as its primary purpose making available an indoor physical, non-sedentary, recreational activity that requires use of specialized equipment to be made available for a fee and that occurs within a defined area of the establishment's premises that is physically segregated and separate from the remainder of the establishment's premises; 
(2)  Provide that the defined area for the recreational activity consist of a rink, court(s), or other recreational area that is suitable and customary for the recreational activity to be undertaken; 
(3)  Prohibit the use or presence of alcohol within the defined area required by this section; 
(4)  Must make food available for consumption by patrons and guests of the establishment; 
(5)  Contain an adequate and sanitary kitchen facility approved by the county health department; employ staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for guests; and serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week with the exception of holidays, vacations, periods of redecoration or remodeling, and other occasions where the establishment is temporarily closed; and 
(6)  Must derive 70 percent of its total food and alcoholic beverage sales from the sale of food. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following are excluded from the definition of an indoor recreational facility and are ineligible for a consumption on the premises license under this section: 
(1)  Health clubs and spas; 
(2)  Health and fitness centers and similar exercise facilities; 
(3)  Martial arts studios and other similar establishments; 
(4)  Facilities used for the purpose of providing personal training services; and 
(5)  Gymnasiums. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-118. - Physical requirements of premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(3)  Private clubs; or 
(4)  Special events facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-119. - Employees of supper club or lounge not to mingle with customers. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a supper club or lounge to dance or sit with customers on the premises. It shall be unlawful for any customer to purchase food or drink for an employee of a lounge or supper club on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-120. - Live music and dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the county fire marshal has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-121. - Purchase of alcoholic beverages by licensee. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of three-fourths of a liter or larger, except for single-serve bottles, unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers, in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the next smallest size to such size containers. 
(Ord. No. 08-72, § 6-112, 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 6-122. - Package sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be sold by the package from premises licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-123—6-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 6-137. - Rent based on sales volume prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-138. - Purchase and sales records. 
(a)  Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold or otherwise dispensed by them. Such records, more specifically described in subsection (c) of this section, shall at all times be open for inspection by the city clerk or his designee. These records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years unless the city manager determines that no such records exist and that it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensee to require the keeping of such records. 
(b)  If the city manager deems it advisable to conduct an audit of the records of a licensee, he shall notify the licensee of the date, time, and place of the audit. The city manager may designate the city's internal auditor or other person to perform the audit, and the licensee shall cooperate with the audit or be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(c)  At the request of the city manager or his designee, the licensee shall make available the following records required to be kept for at least three years: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine, and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees); 
(3)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets; 
(4)  Monthly state sales and use tax reports; and 
(5)  Federal Income Tax returns with all Form 1099s. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-139. - Days when sales unlawful. 
No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-140. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Package licensees shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Retail package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., except that where the retail package license is for the sale of malt beverages or wine, only such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of malt beverages or wine. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees are permitted to engage in licensed activity only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 11:55 p.m. Saturday, and, further, such a licensee may engage in permitted activity between the hours of 11:55 p.m. on Saturday night until 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning but only where the licensee has obtained and maintains the "late night" license described in section 6-88, provided, however, that such "late night" license shall not be required for those operating with a lawfully issued consumption on the premises license as of the date of adoption of this chapter, but such "late night" license shall be required for all new licensees and for renewal of consumption on the premises licensing required after adoption of this chapter in order to thereafter engage in licensed activity between the hours of 11:55 p.m. on Saturday night until 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning. 
(c)  A consumption on the premises licensee shall be allowed to engage in licensed activity on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday morning, provided that the licensee derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed or dispensed on licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. Sunday sales may be made at any time in private clubs. 
(e)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-141. - Prohibited acts; sexual display on licensed premises. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game operated in accordance with state law. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct; breach of the peace; lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices; or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and genitals. 
(e)  No licensee shall allow live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (d) of this section, or where such person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual act prohibited by law. 
(2)  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
(3)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva, or genitals. 
(f)  No licensee shall allow the use of artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform, simulate, or depict any of the prohibited conduct or activities described in subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (d) or (e) of this section. 
(h)  No licensee shall allow to be shown, displayed, or exhibited any film, still picture, electronic reproduction, or image of any act or conduct described in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-142. - Delivery and storage. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler) licensed by the state to make deliveries in the city. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-143. - On-premises consumption unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-144. - Regulation of lighting. 
The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-145. - Condition of premises requirements. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the city manager, chief of police, the county fire chief, county fire marshal and other authorized agents of the city and the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-146. - Change of ownership, profit distribution report required. 
(a)  A licensee shall file with the city manager or police chief a written, sworn report of any of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change in any legal relationship between any parties named in the application for the license; 
(2)  Any change in the payment of rent for leased premises or any change in the ownership of the licensed premises; 
(3)  Any loss or damage to goods or premises of the licensee which results in a claim against an insurance policy; 
(4)  Any change for any purpose in division of net or gross sales of the licensed business; and 
(5)  Any change in any material facts contained in the application for the license. 
(b)  Such report shall be filed within five days after the date the change occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-147. - Kinds of products permitted to be sold. 
(a)  No licensee for the package sale of distilled spirits shall sell or offer for sale, or display, or keep in stock at his place of business where liquor is offered for sale, any other product or commodity, except for the following: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wine, when properly licensed; and 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(3)  Any item permitted by Georgia Department of Revenue regulation 560-2-3-04. 
(b)  No beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in such place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-148—6-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-166. - Handling not to include bagging and carrying out. 
For purposes of this division, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-167. - Age requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term grocery stores or supermarkets shall not include convenience stores. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-168. - Pouring permit required. 
(a)  An employee pouring permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee who dispenses, sells, serves, takes orders for, and/or mixes alcoholic beverages, or serves in any managerial position; and 
(2)  Any employee of an alcoholic beverage caterer who is engaged in handling, selling, or serving alcoholic beverages; provided, however, employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy or cook or dishwasher shall be excluded. 
(b)  An employee pouring permit shall not be required for: 
(1)  The licensee to whom an alcoholic beverage license has been issued under this chapter. 
(2)  Any person authorized by law to serve alcoholic beverage and is working at a temporary, nonprofit fundraising event for which a temporary alcohol permit to sell alcoholic beverages has been issued under this chapter. 
(c)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have a pouring permit until such person has procured such permit. 
(d)  Any person required to obtain a pouring permit shall apply to the police department for such permit on forms prescribed by the chief of police or his designee. 
(e)  When a person applies for an alcohol server's permit, the chief of police, or his designee, shall have a complete and extensive search made to determine if there is a police record of such person. If the search reveals a conviction for an alcohol related offense within five (5) years of the date of the application, or conviction of any felony within five years of the date of the application or evidence that the person's employment would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, issuance of a permit shall be denied. A plea of nolo contendere shall be considered a conviction. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be dismissed without prejudice and the applicant shall be allowed to reapply upon final disposition of any such charge. 
(f)  When any pouring permit is denied, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter within 30 days stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this chapter, describing the requirements not deemed satisfied, and that upon request the chief of police will refer the matter and any evidence the person cares to submit on his/her behalf to the city manager for consideration and, that, if requested, a meeting may be scheduled with the city manager at which time the person shall be provided an opportunity to explain why the permit should not be denied. A request for consideration and any documentation the person wishes to have considered by the city manager upon his/her review must be received by the chief of police within ten days of the date of the denial letter. If the person requests consideration by the city manager as permitted by this paragraph, the person shall present any request for a meeting with the city manager in the request for consideration. The city manager shall consider all information provided to him/her by the chief of police and the applicant/permit holder and issue his/her decision within ten days of submission of the record to him by the chief of police. A meeting with the city manager allowed by this provision shall also be scheduled and held within the ten-day period following submission of the record by the chief of police. If the city manager affirms denial of the permit, written notice shall be provided to the applicant/permit holder by certified mail at the address provided by the applicant/permit holder, describing the reason(s) for denial of the permit. If dissatisfied with the decision, the applicant/permit holder may file a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within five days of receipt of the decision at which point the matter shall be placed on the agenda of the next meeting of the governing authority occurring no earlier than ten days from the filing of the notice of appeal. The decision of the governing authority shall be final unless, to the extent the decision of the governing authority is appealable or otherwise subject to review, such appeal or review is sought in the Superior Court of Paulding County by filing a petition for a writ of certiorari in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(g)  Only one server's permit per individual will be issued for employment at any and all establishments within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of one year and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other investigation as may be required by the city police department. The application for a pouring permit shall be accompanied by the requisite fee in an amount as set in section 6-88. 
(h)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an employee pouring permit if the chief of police receives information which warrants such a new search. 
(i)  If the new search reveals evidence that the person no longer meets the requirements of this chapter, the permit may be suspended or revoked as provided in subsection 6-87(a)(3) of this chapter. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for a person whose pouring permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-169. - Licensee to report disciplinary action. 
Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcoholic beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police and the city clerk of such action within five days of such action. The following shall be considered to be disciplinary action: any arrest; the issuance of any citation; any indictment, presentment, or accusation; any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the license or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to citations for traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-170. - Happy-hour discounts; other unlawful practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit a brewpub from offering a sampler of no more than four types of malt beverages in containers not exceeding four ounces each; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than one and one-half ounces of distilled spirits; 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Secs. 6-171—6-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 6-191. - Sale of drinks containing distilled spirits. 
(a)  Imposed. There is imposed upon the retail sale of drinks containing distilled spirits in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the drink to the consumer. A record of each sale shall be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(b)  Licensee to collect and remit. Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this section from purchasers of drinks containing distilled spirits. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the city manager to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(c)  Customer receipts; credit sales. If requested by the purchaser, a consumption on the premises licensee shall give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and the tax imposed by this section shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the drink to the purchaser. 
(d)  Payment and returns by licensee. 
(1)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(2)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city manager or his designee by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the city may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of drinks containing distilled spirits and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Any amounts collected in excess of three percent of the taxable sales shall be reported and paid to the city. 
(3)  Licensees shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50 as may be amended hereafter are incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130 et seq. 
Sec. 6-192. - Wholesale taxes. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. Remittances shall be accompanied by completed forms as prescribed or authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of distilled spirits as required by this ordinance shall be according to, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; local excise tax on sale of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 6-193. - Deficiency assessment. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, the city may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes until paid, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(c)  The city shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served personally by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing from the United States Postal Service. 
(d)  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-194. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period or periods for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by subsection 6-193(c). 
(b)  If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this chapter, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the licensee shall be added to the estimate of the amount due in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-195. - Interest. 
Any licensee who fails to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay in addition to the principal unpaid amount, interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the date the tax payment was last due until payment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-196. - Actions for collection; overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If the city approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 6-197. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The city manager and police chief shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of any alcoholic beverage, retail or wholesale, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)  In the administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1(Exh. A), 3-7-2017) 
Chapter 7 - SPECIAL EVENTS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 7-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Hiram, Georgia "Special Events Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of certain terms used in this chapter is as follows: 
City means the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Hiram. 
Producer means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing, or conducting a special event. 
Special event means any temporary event, activity, or gathering that is made available for public attendance or participation that will occur on public property and/or on private property where the number of persons participating in the event, activity, or gathering on the property will exceed 20 or which will require or involve one or more of the following activities: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of merchandise, food, or beverages (whether by sale or otherwise) where not otherwise allowed; the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or any other structure; use of any kind of pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; or placement and use of portable toilets (except where designated for use as part of ongoing construction on the property). Examples of "special events" include, but are not limited to, fairs; festivals; "fun runs," walks, and other kinds of races, including bicycle races; parades; rallies; concerts; tours; and block parties. 
(1)  For purposes of this chapter, a special event does not include: 
a.  Gatherings or activities occurring on private property that are not open for public attendance or participation and which make no use of city streets, alleys, or rights-of-way except as otherwise permitted for lawful access or lawful parking; 
b.  Gatherings or activities occurring on city park property that are intended to be private events and do not significantly vary from the customary use of the property (e.g., family cookouts, birthday parties); 
c.  Regularly scheduled or occurring events on city park property by persons, organizations, or other entities with ongoing agreements with the city for the use of city park property; 
d.  Garage sales, estate sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, or any similar casual, sporadic sale of goods and merchandise by the owner of the property on which the event or activity is conducted; 
e.  The display of goods, merchandise, or services for sale on a public sidewalk or other public property immediately adjacent to the store or space by an ongoing, lawfully licensed business that occupies the immediately adjacent store or space, but excluding those subject to the commercial soliciting ordinance found at chapter 12, article IX of the City's Code of Ordinances, so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and so long as other applicable laws and ordinances that may pertain to such activity are satisfied; 
f.  Any procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with a funeral; and 
Vendor means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity that engages in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary basis on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or private property as an authorized participant in a special event. Vendors participating as part of a special event for which a lawful permit has been issued are excused from complying with the city's commercial soliciting ordinance for the duration of the vendors' participation in the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-3. - Permit required; display of permit; certain prescribed limitations. 
Except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, it is unlawful for any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the city without having first obtained a valid special event permit from the city. The permit issued must be displayed prominently by the producer during and throughout the special event at the location of the special event or be available upon request for review and inspection. Special event permits are temporary and shall not vest any permanent property rights. Issued permits are effective only for the time period described on the permit. Special events are limited to the hours of operation specified in the permit. In no instance shall a special event be permitted to occur over the course of any more than three consecutive calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-4. - Application required for permit. 
Except where otherwise permitted by this chapter, not less than 60 days nor more than 120 days prior to the special event, the producer shall apply for a special event permit and provide the following information and materials: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of the producer of the special event and, if a corporation, partnership, or other entity, the name, address, email address, and telephone number of a person designated as responsible for compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable chapters, all jointly known as the "producer." 
(2)  A description of the special event proposed. 
(3)  The date(s), location(s), and hours of operation proposed for the special event. 
(4)  A schedule, however tentative, of proposed activities, including a description of each vendor for the sale of food, food products, goods, merchandise, services, or alcohol contemplated for the special event. The city must be provided at the earliest opportunity any update to the schedule and accompanying description as the schedule of activities becomes more definite or changes. 
(5)  An estimate of the number of participants in the special event and projected attendance for the special event. The producer is required to promptly update the city on any significant changes or anticipated changes in these figures. 
(6)  A description of any services anticipated as being needed from the city. The producer is required to promptly update this description and notify the city at the earliest opportunity as any need or anticipated need for services changes. 
(7)  A description of any of the following elements contemplated for use or need in conducting the special event: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of (whether by sale or otherwise) merchandise, food, or beverages on public property or on private property where not otherwise allowed; the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or other structure; pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; placement and use of portable toilets; and signage. Use of signage is permitted and regulated only in accordance with the city's sign ordinance found in article XII of the City of Hiram Zoning Ordinance. 
(8)  A plan for responding to medical and other public safety incidents and emergencies occurring during the special event. 
(9)  A plan for parking along with plans for restroom facilities and the collection and removal of rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event. An acceptable plan must provide for the immediate removal of all rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event upon the conclusion of the special event or, for multi-day events, each day of a multi-day event. For multi-day special events, an acceptable plan must provide for removal of all rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated each day; provided, however, that exceptions, with written approval from the city manager, may be provided for certain types of rubbish, garbage, and other waste byproducts where daily removal for a multi-day event is not reasonably practicable and the public's health, welfare, and safety would reasonably be determined not to be endangered. 
(10)  A reasonably accurate depiction of the location of the special event and its boundaries and, further, identifying all buildings, structures, parking, and curb cuts already existing on the property proposed for the special event and immediately adjacent to the property. Also identified on the depiction shall be the locations for any temporary structures, including toilet facilities, and parking to be utilized with the special event. 
The 60—120 day window for applying for a special event permit is waived for special events proposed in response to immediate, current events defined as events occurring within seven days prior to the proposed special event. In such instances the producer of the special event is required to submit the application required by this section no later than 72 hours prior to the special event, and, if not practicable, the producer shall give the city manager written notice of the special event at least 24 hours prior to its commencement and provide with the notice as much of the information required in this section as is possible and practicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-5. - Additional items required for consideration and issuance of a permit. 
In addition to the information required above in an application for a special event permit, the following materials and information must be provided in support of and in addition to the application, all of which must be provided before an application will be considered: 
(1)  If the producer is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation, a representation that the corporation is qualified to do business in Georgia, and the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation in Georgia. 
(2)  A sworn declaration that the producer is in compliance with the State of Georgia SAVE and E-Verify requirements or that the producer is not subject to those requirements, describing the reason(s) for any claimed exemption with sufficient particularity to permit a determination of the bona fides of the claim. 
(3)  The producer's State of Georgia Department of Revenue sales and/or use tax registration number or an explanation describing the reason(s) for any claimed exemption with sufficient particularity to permit a determination of the bona fides of the claim. 
(4)  Identification of any location(s) within the prior 12 months where the producer conducted a similar special event. 
(5)  If the special event is to be held on private property, notarized, written permission of the property owner or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(6)  A legible copy of any current occupation tax certificate issued by a governing body in the State of Georgia. If the producer cannot produce a duly issued occupation tax certificate and is not otherwise exempted from compliance, then the producer must, as a condition for a permit, file for an occupation tax certificate from the city. If an exemption is claimed from payment of an occupation tax, the producer shall describe the exemption with sufficient particularity to determine the bona fides of such a claim. 
(7)  Copies of written notices informing residences and businesses adjacent to the event area of the intent to host a special event. If the special event involves a parade, procession, or other event without a centralized location, this notification requirement may be waived by the city manager upon request. This notification requirement may also be waived if the city manager determines it would be unreasonable and unduly burdensome in light of the number of residences and businesses to be notified. 
(8)  Proof of comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. Such insurance must provide at a minimum $1,000,000.00 of coverage for personal injury per person and $1,000,000.00 of property damage coverage covering all claims arising from a permit issued under this chapter. The city manager may waive or reduce this requirement for a special event that: 
a.  Will not require or involve one or more of the following activities: closing (full or partial) of a public street; blocking or obstructing public property; the provision of merchandise, food, or beverages (whether by sale or otherwise); the erection, use, or installation of a tent, canopy, stage, trailer, grandstand, bleachers, or any other structure; use of any kind of pyrotechnics or sound amplification devices; or placement and use of portable toilets; and 
b.  Is in response to an immediate, current event defined as national, state, or local event or incident occurring within seven days prior to the proposed special event; or 
c.  Is produced by an entity or organization recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service as satisfying the requirements of 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. Proper proof of Section 501(c) status and/or registration as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. is required. 
In exercising this discretion, the city manager shall consider the nature of the activities planned for the participants in the proposed special event; the risk of potential injury or harm to private property and private persons arising from the activities planned for the participants in the proposed special event; and the risk of potential injury or harm to public property arising from the activity planned for the participants in the proposed special event. 
(9)  The producer shall provide a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city providing that the producer shall defend, pay, and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents from liability for all personal and property damages arising from any acts or omissions resulting from a special event, inclusive also of any claims for attorneys' fees and costs connected with such claims, except for such claims arising solely from the negligent acts of the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees, and agents. 
(10)  Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the city and reasonably related to the scope and scale of the special event, how it is to be conducted, and the other information required by this chapter to be provided. 
(11)  In addition, the producer shall confer with the appropriate city representatives and establish an acceptable plan for vehicular/pedestrian traffic, crowd and traffic control, and security for the special event proposed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-6. - Application fee. 
(a)  An application fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed for a special event permit to defray the city's administrative expense and costs. The fee shall be set from time to time as determined by the governing authority. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(b)  Exempt from payment of the application fee is any special event on behalf of or seeking to benefit wholly (1) an entity or organization recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue Service as satisfying the requirements of 26 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (2) a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. Proper proof of section 501(c) status and/or registration as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. is required for this exemption. The exemption for a charitable organization subject to and governed by O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. applies only for a special event seeking to raise support for or awareness of a charitable purpose as that phrase is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-17-2(3), as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-7. - Permit conditions. 
Any special event permit issued by the city is subject to the following conditions and any other conditions determined to be reasonably necessary to protect the city's public safety, health, welfare, and good order: 
(1)  The permit is limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place. The producer or other person designated as provided in section 7-4 is responsible for providing for security and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to the event. 
(2)  Except as needed for clearing the event area(s) of all activities and related structures, no special event shall continue beyond the time approved on the permit. 
(3)  The special event must comply with the city's noise ordinance and all other ordinances governing the conduct of the special event. 
(4)  The use of glass containers within the area designated for the special event is prohibited. 
(5)  Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands, bleachers, and other temporary facilities or structures to be constructed, erected, and used in conjunction with the special event must be approved, if applicable, by the fire marshal and building inspector. 
(6)  The city shall have the right to require immediate termination or cessation of a special event if a determination is made that the special event or aspects of the special event create or present an imminent threat to the public's safety, health, welfare, and good order. Upon being notified that the special event or an aspect of the special event must cease, it shall be unlawful for the producer and any participants to allow such activity to continue. 
(7)  To the extent signage for the special event is desired, compliance with the city's sign ordinance is required. 
(8)  A permit issued under this chapter may not be assigned or transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-8. - Application processing and review. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall determine within two business days of receipt of an application if the application is complete. If the application is incomplete, the producer shall be notified of the deficiencies. No further action will be taken in connection with the application and request for a permit until all information required by this chapter has been provided. 
(b)  Upon providing a complete application and all other information required by this chapter, the application shall be circulated within two business days to each government department whose services would be required or would reasonably be affected by the special event proposed. Each such department shall review the application and provide the city manager or his/her designee with an assessment and evaluation of the impact reasonably to be expected by the special event proposed on the factors identified in section 7-9 below. This review and provision of an assessment and evaluation shall be accomplished within seven business days of circulation absent agreement with the producer for additional time. If additional time is necessary due to the absence of one or more persons who would review the request for a permit and the producer does not agree to additional time to permit the person(s) to review the application and materials, the application may be denied for lack of appropriate review. 
(c)  Upon receiving the departmental assessment(s) and evaluation(s), the city manager may require the producer to provide additional information or response to address any concern(s) or issue(s) raised if such is reasonably necessary to address any of the factors to be evaluated per section 7-9 below. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-9. - Approval and revocation of a special event permit. 
(a)  Upon submission of a complete application and all information and materials required by this chapter, payment of any required fee, receipt of all information from government departments per section 7-8 above, the city manager shall, within three business days, act on the request for a special event permit unless additional time is provided by agreement with the producer. If additional time is necessary due to the absence of the city manager and the producer does not agree to additional time to permit the city manager's review of the application and materials, the application may be denied for lack of appropriate review. 
(b)  A permit shall be issued where the city manager finds that: 
(1)  The application is complete and all materials and information required in support of the application has been provided and the information provided is reasonably determined to be accurate; 
(2)  The event will not unduly inconvenience the public in using public areas normally open for general public use or the city in conducting governmental operations; 
(3)  Adequate provision is or will be made for responding to medical and other public safety incidents and emergencies occurring during the special event; 
(4)  Adequate provision is or will be made for parking, vehicular/pedestrian traffic, crowd and traffic control, and security along with plans for restroom facilities and the collection and removal of rubbish, garbage, and any other waste byproducts generated by the special event; 
(5)  The producer has paid all fees required and otherwise provided, where required, for payment of other costs and expenses otherwise necessitated by or reasonably anticipated for the event; and 
(6)  Neither any other event is scheduled elsewhere in the city nor any other objectively determined set of conditions exist whereby City resources (including, but not limited to, law enforcement or public works personnel) required for the events and circumstances are so great that deployment would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the public welfare, health, safety, or good order; 
(c)  Conditions may be imposed with issuance of a permit to reasonably address concerns described in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  A special event permit may be revoked or denied by the city upon determining that: 
(1)  False or incomplete information was provided on or in support of the permit application; 
(2)  The producer has not complied with all terms and conditions of the permit and any other applicable laws, including the requirements of this or any other city ordinance; 
(3)  The fees, costs, and expenses required have not been paid or acceptable, alternative arrangements have not been made with the city and confirmed in writing by the city for payment of same; or 
(4)  There exists an emergency or exigent circumstances such as a disaster or public calamity that impacts the public safety, health, welfare, and good order to such an extent that it is reasonably prudent to revoke or deny the permit. 
(e)  If an application for a permit is denied or issued subject to additional conditions, or if a permit is revoked, the city manager shall notify the producer in writing of the action, the reason(s) for same, and the right to an appeal. If the permit is revoked, the special event may not proceed and, if revoked while ongoing, the special event must cease immediately. 
(f)  If an application for a permit is denied or issued subject to additional conditions, or if a permit is revoked, the producer may request in writing that the action be reviewed by the governing authority. Such a request must be submitted to the city clerk within five days of the action complained of and must state with specificity the grounds for the appeal. 
(1)  The hearing before the governing authority shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days of the filing of the appeal. The governing authority has the discretion, upon determining that exigent circumstances warrant, to schedule and hold an earlier meeting to consider an appeal. 
(2)  The appeal hearing shall be limited to the grounds stated in the appeal unless, for good cause shown, the governing authority determines to hear other grounds. The city manager and other persons directly affected by the decision at issue may speak and present evidence at the hearing and the parties may be represented by counsel at the appeal hearing. 
(3)  The governing authority shall issue its decision on the appeal within five days of concluding the hearing. 
(g)  A decision upholding denial, grant with additional conditions, or revocation of a permit may be appealed by way of a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Paulding County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-10. - Vendors. 
(a)  The sale of food, food products, and/or merchandise, goods, or services by vendors shall be allowed as a component of a special event, provided that each vendor is authorized in writing by the producer to participate in the event and provided further that each vendor shall be subject to all conditions and limitation imposed in writing for the special event by the producer. The written authorizations and the conditions and limitations imposed by the producer shall be submitted promptly to the city in advance of the special event. 
(b)  The producer shall be responsible for all vendors as a component of the special event and shall be responsible for designating the location and activities of vendors consistent with a special event permit and any applicable conditions. 
(c)  Authorized vendors of the producer providing food and/or merchandise for sale are not required to obtain or possess a separate vendor's permit to operate during the special event unless the vendor is a provider of alcoholic beverages as a part of the special event. This provision notwithstanding, food vendors authorized by the producer are required to comply with the rules and regulations of the state and the Paulding County health department as to the preparation and service of food. 
(d)  The dispensing of alcoholic beverages, by sale or otherwise, as a part of the special event shall be allowed provided that each vendor is authorized to participate by the producer and, provided further, that each vendor dispensing alcoholic beverages shall have been duly licensed by the state, city, or other local governing authority to engage in off-premises dispensation and has complied with all provisions of the city's ordinances relating to the sale or dispensation otherwise of alcoholic beverages off premises. 
(e)  Each authorized vendor shall prominently display a badge or other notification signifying the vendor's status as one authorized to participate in the special event by the producer. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized vendor to engage in any business within a distance of 100 yards of the special event from one hour before the scheduled start time for the special event until one hour after the schedule ending time for the special event. This provision does not preclude the transacting of the usual and customary business of a person or entity possessing a valid occupation tax certificate issued by the City for transacting business at a fixed location that happens to be adjacent to or within 100 yards of the property on which the special event is held. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-11. - City co-sponsorship of special events. 
The city may co-sponsor a proposed special event upon a request by an applicant for a special event permit or upon acceptance by a producer of an offer for such co-sponsorship. Co-sponsorship may take the form of a monetary contribution in support of the special event, provision of services in-kind at no cost to the producer, or both. Decisions on whether to participate in the proposed special event as a co-sponsor and what will be provided as a co-sponsor are entrusted to the discretion of the governing authority for which no appeal shall be permitted. Co-sponsorship of a proposed special event is limited only to those events where the producer is an entity whose primary purpose is to promote economic development in the city or Paulding County or an entity that is a non-profit organization that seeks to promote and advance the health, welfare, or safety of the public or a segment of the public within the city or Paulding County and which has its principal place of business located in the city or Paulding County. As a part of the application process an applicant may request that the city co-sponsor the proposed special event. The request must be in writing, describe with particularity the type(s) of co-sponsorship desired, and describe how the special event proposed will enhance or promote economic development in the city or promote and advance the health, welfare, or safety of the public or a segment of the public within the city or Paulding County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-12. - Compliance with additional provisions required. 
Nothing about this chapter constitutes a waiver of the applicability of any other provision of the City's Code of Ordinances to the special event or the manner in which it will be conducted. Likewise, all provisions of any applicable state or federal law must be complied with in connection with the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 7-13. - Penalty for violations. 
A violation of this chapter is punishable as provided for in section 1-12 of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-6-2014) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any animal which has been: 
(1)  Placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for; 
(2)  Placed upon the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the property and is left unattended or uncared for; or 
(3)  On the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for more than 36 hours unattended and without food and water. 
Animal means any type of domestic animal commonly kept as a pet including, but not limited to, dogs and cats. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
At large. An animal is considered at large when it is not under control as provided in this chapter. 
Auctions means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as defined in this chapter. 
Cruelty means every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
Fenced enclosure means an enclosure made of wire, wood, stone or other materials which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. An "invisible fence" is not an acceptable fenced enclosure for an animal. 
Hobby breeder means a person who offers for sale one litter of animals during a 12-month period per household. A household which sells two litters during a 12-month period, even if the litters are produced from different animals, will not be considered a hobby breeder and will be subject to the registration procedures applicable to animal establishments and breeders as designated in this chapter. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include, but not to be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means any premises where any person who engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals and facilities owned and/or operated by government entities. 
Neutered means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making; 
(4)  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
(5)  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
Owner means any person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal, including, but not limited to, the caretaker or custodian of any animal or person harboring or having control of an animal. An animal is deemed in a person's possession if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
Pet shop means any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
Spayed means incapable of sexual reproduction. 
Under control. Any animal shall be considered under control if it is on the property and/or premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain, or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner when away from the premises of the owner. An animal may be considered under control if the owner is accompanying the animal and has voice, whistle or other control over such animal and such animal is trained to respond to such voice, whistle or other control. The burden of proving that an animal is trained to respond to voice, whistle or other control remains with the owner of such animal and a rebuttable presumption exists that an animal which is not confined to the premises of its owner without being secured by a chain, leash or lead of sufficient strength or fence to prevent it from escaping is not under control of its owner. 
Unsanitary means and involves conditions such as, but not limited to, filth and bacteria, which endanger the health of humans and/or animals. 
Veterinary clinic and hospital means a clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
Vicious animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more documented unprovoked attacks or threats of attack of such severity as to cause physical injury, or significant mental trauma to the victim. An animal is also considered to be vicious if it makes an unprovoked attack on other animals or on physical property. Animal attacks shall be documented by reporting such attacks to the county animal control office. If the animal attack involves the biting of a person or another animal, the attack shall also be reported to the county animal control office. 
Wild and exotic animals means any monkey or other nonhuman primate, such as raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, llama, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, poisonous snakes, caiman, and gavial, and any other animal so designated by the animal control department. 
Sec. 8-2. - Scope of chapter. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal, state or municipal law. 
Sec. 8-3. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the county animal control department under contract with the city and may also be enforced by the city police department. Persons in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2013-5, § 1, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-4. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the county animal control department, the city police department, or any other officer in the performance of his duties. No person shall seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-5, § 2, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-5. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The county animal control officers, city police officers, and all other law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to, an animal that has bitten a person within ten days of the biting incident. 
(b)  The county animal control department or city police department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 13. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control department or its officers or the city police department or its officers for this action. 
(Ord. No. 2013-5, § 3, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-6. - Summons. 
Representatives of the county animal control department and city police department are hereby authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The summons shall be in a form approved by the municipal court, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the municipal court on a date certain to answer all charges therein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-5, § 4, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-7. - Maintenance of premises. 
An animal owner's premises shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to the adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing or operating a business within 50 feet of the premises. 
Sec. 8-8. - Animal or fowl enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control or possess any pasture or enclosure for livestock or fowl in any fashion not authorized by the zoning ordinances of the city. All pastures or enclosures shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition. 
Sec. 8-9. - Confinement of animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any animal owner to ensure an animal is under control of its owner and to prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person. An animal may leave the property of the animal owner, but the animal owner must have the animal under control and must prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person without the permission of that person, or from attacking, threatening or harassing other persons, or from damaging other persons' property. No animal shall be allowed to roam free and when not on the property of its owner must be on a leash, or similar physical control device, and in the control of a person. 
(b)  Any owner of a domestic animal will confine that animal inside a building or fenced enclosure. No animal shall be tied as a permanent measure of restraint, nor left unattended on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash, or similar tethering device in an unfenced area where people or other animals can wander into the tethered animal's proximity. Any animal owner restraining an animal without the use of a fenced enclosure will be in violation of this chapter. Animals who are tied on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash or other similar tethering device as a temporary measure of restraint within a building or fenced enclosure shall not be tethered more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. 
(c)  Any owner of a female animal in heat (capable to be bred and become pregnant) shall confine such animal in a building or secure enclosure (sufficient to prevent the female animal in heat from escaping and to prevent another animal from entering the enclosure) to prevent breeding. Any female animal in heat roaming loose or tethered without the protection of a fence or barrier will be in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Persons who permit their animals to defecate on public or private property other than their own property are required to immediately pick up the feces, bag the feces, and properly dispose of the feces. Such animal waste shall be removed by placing said matter in a closed or sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in the animal owner's or public trash receptacle, sanitary disposal unit or other closed or sealed refuse container. This subsection shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons using guide dogs or assistance dogs; 
(2)  Hunting dogs being used in a legal hunt with permission of the property owner; or 
(3)  Law enforcement officers working police trained dogs. 
Sec. 8-10. - Restraint. 
It shall be the duty of any animal owner to restrain his animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from attacking, threatening, or harassing any person on the public right-of-way of the roads, streets, highways and sidewalks in the county. 
Sec. 8-11. - Vicious animals. 
Any owner of a vicious animal shall confine it within a building or secured enclosure (sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping and to prevent a person or another animal from entering the enclosure) and will not remove it from such building or fenced enclosure unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a person who is at least 18 years of age or older. Any vicious animal not secured as provided in this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or confined by the animal control department for a period of 30 days, provided that, if an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended within the discretion of the animal control department, until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any vicious animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that the animal be humanely destroyed. 
Sec. 8-12. - Animal noises. 
(a)  Generally. An owner of an animal shall not permit such animal to make frequent or continuous unnecessary noises or sounds across a residential or commercial boundary line. 
(1)  The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which annoy or disturb an ordinary reasonable person of normal sensitivities across a residential or commercial boundary line shall be considered a nuisance and violation of this article. Provided however, for the purpose of this article, "barking animal" shall mean an animal that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 15 consecutive minutes at any time of the day or night; or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that an animal shall not be deemed a "barking animal" if, at the time the animal is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the animal is situated. 
(2)  Any person disturbed by such noise from a barking animal may file a complaint with the animal control department. 
(b)  Complaint procedure. A complaint of animal noise shall be submitted to either the county animal control department or the city police department in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The complainant shall submit a complaint form stating the name and address of complainant, the name and address of the owner of the animal causing the disturbance, the type and physical description of such animal, and a description of the nature of the disturbance. 
(2)  Such complaint form shall be accompanied by subsection (b)(2)a or (b)(2)b of this section. 
a.  A videotape (for the purposes of this chapter the "videotape" must be either presented on a standard VHS format videotape, or in a digital format, upon optic media, either a CD or DVD, in a Microsoft Windows Media Player-compatible format), complete with sound, which depicts the animal responsible for the disturbance, in the act of causing or making disturbing and unnecessary sounds and/or noises for a period of no less than 15 minutes; the residence of the owner of such offending animal, unless the animal is being kept on commercial premises, in which case the videotape shall show such premises; and the premises of the complainant showing the distance between the complainant's premises and the premises of the owner of the offending animal; or 
b.  An audiocassette (for the purposes of this chapter the "audiocassette" must be presented on a standard audio cassette; a microcassette or minicassette can not be submitted or accepted) which includes a recording of the animal responsible for the disturbance in the act of causing or making the noises or sounds complained of for a period of no less than 15 minutes; a description of the approximate distance between the complainant's premises and the offending animal; and a statement by the complainant describing the approximate distance between the audiocassette recorder and the offending animal at the time the recording was made. If the complainant seeks to submit an audiocassette recording to verify the written complaint, he shall include the signed statements of two persons, not related to the complainant, witnessing the recording that the recording is true and accurate. 
(c)  Department action. Upon receipt of a complaint submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section, either the county animal control department or the city police department receiving the complaint shall conduct an investigation of the complaint and, upon its determination that a violation has occurred, may issue a citation to the owner of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-5, § 5, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-13. - Rabid animals. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the state department of human resources and the animal control department all cases of rabies in animals treated by the veterinarian, giving the name and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by the rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the state department of human resources and the animal control department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal or person has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound the animal in the facility of a competent veterinarian or animal shelter within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for any period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. 
Sec. 8-14. - Cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person by commission or omission to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for with proper food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for with access to adequate shelter to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal they own or provide care for access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times; 
(5)  Intentionally poison any domestic animal; 
(6)  Allow or permit any fight between animals, or to allow or permit a fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; 
(7)  Allow an animal they own or provide care for to be kept in unsanitary conditions; 
(8)  Keep or confine any animal in other than a humane manner. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to release any animal on any property with the intent to abandon the animal. Each person who does abandon, knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment or aids in the abandonment of any animal, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 8-15. - Vaccination, proof required. 
(a)  Any animal owner within the county shall have their animals over three months of age, including but not limited to dogs and cats, inoculated for the prevention of rabies in a manner preapproved in writing by the county health department or by a licensed veterinarian in a manner consistent with state law and county department of health policies and regulations. Animal owners must be able to provide satisfactory documentation to animal control representative in the event that the animal: 
(1)  Has been impounded by an animal control employee, 
(2)  Is in the care and custody of animal control after being identified as a stray or abandoned animal, 
(3)  Has been found to be the cause, source or is otherwise identified as being involved in a violation of any other county ordinance or state law, 
(4)  Has bitten or scratched a human, 
(5)  Has bitten or scratched another animal, 
(6)  Has been in contact or otherwise exposed to a suspected rabid animal, 
(7)  Is being walked in a public area. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, satisfactory documentation shall include at least one of the following: 
(1)  A current rabies vaccination tag identifying the name or otherwise identifying title of the animal in question which also displays a state-issued rabies vaccination control number, 
(2)  A copy of the paid invoice from a veterinarian's office, indicating that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination, 
(3)  A letter or form from a veterinarian's office, stating that the office records indicate that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination; and that such vaccination is currently effective, 
(4)  A letter or form from the county health department, stating that the office records indicate that the animal in question was administered a rabies vaccination; and that such vaccination is currently effective. 
(c)  The animal control department may adopt any other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(d)  All rules and regulations of the county board of health and the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated in this chapter by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
Sec. 8-16. - Wildlife sanctuary established. 
The city is hereby declared a sanctuary for birds and wild fowl. It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. Anyone violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2; Ord. of 4-5-1976) 
Sec. 8-17. - Keeping of hogs. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person wishing to keep or allow a hog on any property within the city limits must obtain a permit from the governing authority, and must apply for such permit in person. 
(b)  Sanitary requirements; inspection. After a permit is obtained from the city, the city police will make monthly inspections of such property, and, if unsanitary conditions exist, the police will have the power to give the owner ten days to correct such unsanitary conditions. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section. At the end of ten days' notice when unsanitary conditions continue to exist, a three-day notice will be provided to remove such hog. 
(Code 1965, ch. 1, §§ 3—5; Code 1996, § 10-4) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the qualified building official as designated by the city or as employed pursuant to intergovernmental contract with Paulding County. 
Sec. 10-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official is hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)  The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes. 
Sec. 10-3. - Adoption of technical codes. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for by subsequent ordinance or another provision of this Code, the technical building and construction codes listed in this section are adopted by reference and incorporated into this Code as if set out fully herein, including the administration and appendix chapters also contained in those codes. The state minimum codes enumerated under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007. 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(3)  International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2008. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(5)  International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(6)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2007 and 2008. 
(7)  National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, with Georgia Amendments 2006. 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia Supplements and Amendments 2008. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 Edition, as amended. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code (2006 Edition). 
(11)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Appendix G, as the Standard Swimming Pool Code. 
(b)  The county amendments to the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are hereby adopted by the city and incorporated by reference as fully as though set out at length herein. Copies of all county amendments are available for public inspection in the office of the county building official. 
(c)  Where not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, county code chapter 18, pertaining to buildings and building regulations, is adopted as an ordinance of the city and is incorporated by reference as fully as though set out at length. A current copy of chapter 18 of the county code shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 14-31) 
Editor's note— The city has entered into an agreement with the county whereby the county will provide building inspections and enforcement of the various construction codes adopted in this section. A copy of such agreement is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-4. - Scope. 
Where in any specific case, different sections of these technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. A brief description of the general applicability of each code is presented as follows: 
(1)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of these technical codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these technical codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(2)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the technical codes. 
(3)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code test, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(4)  Safety and maintenance of structures. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
Sec. 10-5. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Code compliance. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change in occupancy classification. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Historic structures. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structure identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
Sec. 10-6. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  Generally. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with the intent and purpose of each such code. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of these technical codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building, structure or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to these technical codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and if no such person is able to be located at the property, then the notice may be posted on the permit at the site, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits for misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(e)  Revocation of permits for violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of these technical codes. 
(f)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems that are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(g)  Requirements not covered by codes. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(h)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided he finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
Sec. 10-7. - Permit required. 
Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the county permits and inspections division and obtain the required permit for the work. The permit holder is subject to all county requirements related to such permits. 
Sec. 10-8. - Tests. 
The county building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
Secs. 10-9—10-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FENCES 

Sec. 10-33. - Applicability. 
The provisions in this article shall govern the location and height of fences and walls within the city. 
Sec. 10-34. - In the front yard. 
Fences and walls in the front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. Fences and walls shall be set back at least two feet from the edge of the right-of-way and must conform to clear view triangle standards. Chain link fences are prohibited in the front yard. 
Sec. 10-35. - In the side yard. 
Fences and walls may be placed on or behind the side property line. No fence or wall shall exceed six feet eight inches in height within the required side yard setback area from a street. In commercial and industrial districts, ten feet shall be the maximum height behind the required street setback and in the side yards not bordering a street. 
Sec. 10-36. - In the rear yard. 
Fences and walls may be placed on or behind the rear property line. In the residential districts six feet eight inches is the maximum fence or wall height in the rear yard. Provided, that when the rear yard abuts a designated arterial, the maximum height shall be eight feet. In a commercial or industrial district, ten feet is the maximum height. 
Sec. 10-37. - Fence and wall construction materials. 
Fences and walls constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be constructed of any of the following materials: 
(1)  Chain link (vinyl and non-vinyl coated in the colors of green or black). 
(2)  Masonry (brick, stuccoed concrete block). 
(3)  Wood (generally produced for fence construction). 
(4)  Wood-like materials. 
(5)  Barbed wire or hog wire in agriculturally zoned areas only. 
(6)  Stone. 
(7)  Wrought iron. 
(8)  Plastic designed to resemble iron fencing. 
Sec. 10-38. - Gates required. 
In those instances where a fence or wall is erected as an enclosure which restricts access from the front to the rear yard, a gate shall be a minimum of three feet in width. The location of the gate shall be positioned at any point paralleling the front lot line between the side lot line and the principal structure. 
Sec. 10-39. - Maintenance. 
Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair, damage, or unsightliness, or constitute a nuisance, public or private. Any such fence or wall which is, or has become dangerous to the public safety, health or welfare, or has become unsightly through improper maintenance or neglect is a public nuisance and the building official shall commence proper proceedings for the abatement thereof. 
Sec. 10-40. - Exemptions. 
Areas zoned agricultural are exempt from the height requirements of this chapter. 
Sec. 10-41. - Finished fence. 
The finished side of a fence shall face to the outside of the property. 
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I; limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1—12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 10, 2015, repealed Art. II in its entirety and enacted a new Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 12-16—12-45, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1966, §§ 18-31—18-53, 18-56, 18-57, 18-59, 18-60; Ord. adopted Nov. 6, 1995(2), §§ 19-36, 19-37, 19-39—19-42, 19-44—19-51, 19-55, 19-56, 19-60—19-66, 19-69, 19-70, 19-72, 19-73; Ord. No. 11-19, adopted Feb. 1, 2011; Ord. No. 2012-7, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2012. 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 12-16. - Purpose and scope of occupational tax; occupation tax required, occupation tax certificate required; display of occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a business, trade, profession or occupation, whether with a location within the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be based upon gross receipts in combination with profitability ratio and number of employees. The profitability ratio for the type of business will be determined from nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. 
(d)  Any person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city shall receive an occupation tax certificate upon submission of the appropriate tax and providing proof of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  The occupation tax certificate provided for in this section shall be issued by the city manager or designee. 
(f)  Occupation tax certificates shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the authorized enforcement officer of the city or designee upon request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirement to display the certificate shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-17. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income, including, but not limited to, sole proprietors receiving a form IRS 1099 from another business at the same location. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation, or whose employer issues to such individuals, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period including, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" does not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by the local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee. Regulatory fees do not include required occupation taxes for businesses and professions located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-18. - Occupational taxes due and payable dates. 
(a)  Occupational taxes on businesses continuing from the preceding year shall be due and payable on January 1 of each subsequent year. Occupational tax due from businesses continuing operation in the current year from the preceding year shall be considered delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. Any business failing to pay the occupational taxes by April 1 shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and 1½ percent per month interest as provided by state law. 
(b)  If a business begins on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
Any business failing to pay the occupational taxes within 120 days after commencement shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fees due and one and one-half percent per month interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes and regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-19. - Applicant requirements. 
(a)  Any person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city shall submit an occupation tax certificate application with supporting documentation showing compliance with all applicable provisions of state, county, and city laws relating to their business, trade, profession, or occupation. 
(b)  Any person who performs any business, occupation or profession subject to an occupation tax in the city is required to provide the following information when paying such occupation tax: 
(1)  The legal name of the business; 
(2)  Any associated trade names for the business; 
(3)  The mailing address for the business; 
(4)  The actual physical address of each location of the business, if it is different than the mailing address; 
(5)  A detailed description of all business activity(ies); 
(6)  The North American Industry Classification System code (NAICS) applicable to such business, based on the dominant line of business; and 
(7)  The sales and use tax identification number assigned to the business by the state department of revenue, if the business is required by law to have such a number. 
(8)  Federal tax identification number. 
(9)  Taxable gross receipts as defined under section 12-16 in the form of an affidavit provided by the city. 
(10)  Any additional information and documents as required by the city. 
(11)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(12)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. This requirement to display the license shall not apply to lawyers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-20. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes shall be assigned a code in accordance to the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) on the basis of their dominant line of business; each NAICS code shall be assigned to a profitability class as established by the city council in accordance with statistics of income, business income tax returns, United States Treasury Department, or Internal Revenue Service. The city manager or designee shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability established by the city council are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, available for inspection by all interested persons. 
(c)  Businesses engaged in more than one business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant line of business at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-21. - Occupation tax levied; rate of tax; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon a combination of profitability classification, taxable gross receipts and the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts and number of employees to the tax rate table for the business' profitability classification established for each business type. 
(c)  The tax rate for the classifications shall be set by council with resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on taxable gross receipts during the current calendar year and the number of employees to be employed in the business conducted. For new businesses, the occupation tax for the year of commencement shall be based upon an estimate of gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of that year. Continuing businesses subject to the occupational tax shall file with the city an affidavit showing all gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. This affidavit showing preceding calendar year gross receipts shall be used as an estimate of gross receipts for making payments on the occupation tax for the current tax year. The number of employees reported for the current year's business operations may be based upon the number of employees employed in the business conducted during the previous year. Applicants or owners engaged in the business shall be reported as employees of the business. The affidavit showing the business' preceding year's actual gross receipts and number of employees shall also be used to adjust the estimated occupation tax for the same period. Should a business not continue or terminate during the year, such business shall notify the city's business occupation tax section and file a final return reporting the actual number of employees and those gross receipts not previously reported and making payment of any tax due. 
(e)  The gross receipts tax shall include a flat rate of $125.00 for the first $249,999.99 of gross revenue and a fee per employee. Gross revenues above $250,000.00 are taxed using a class table based on profitability, a tax factor and a fee per employee. The tax rate table will be set by mayor and council by ordinance or resolution. 
(f)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the affidavit shall contain a figure that puts such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(g)  In the event a business's actual amount of gross receipts in a given year are less than what was estimated, and it results in a fee difference, the business shall be responsible for submitting a written request for a refund of the difference by April 1 of the subsequent tax year; said request must be accompanied by financial support, i.e. tax return for that tax year. If the refund is substantiated, a refund will be processed within 30 days. 
(h)  In the event a business's actual amount of gross receipts in a given year are more than what was estimated, and it results in a fee difference, the business shall be responsible for payment of the difference upon subsequent year's renewal, termination of the business or April 1 of the subsequent year, whichever is sooner; this additional tax due is subject to the penalties as outlined in this chapter for occupation taxes due. 
(i)  No refund or proration shall be made for a taxpayer who shall cease doing business or remove the business from the city. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins or continues business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins or continues. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax within 120 days after December 31 shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on the 121st day of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the State Bar of Georgia. The general penalty for continuing violations of this code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. 
(k)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(l)  Real estate brokers shall pay an occupational tax for each principal office and each separate branch office located in the city based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the city. Payment of the occupation tax shall permit the broker, the broker's affiliated associates and salespersons to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 without further licensing or taxing other than the state licenses issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 40. No additional license, occupation or professional tax shall be required of the brokers affiliated associate brokers or salespersons; provided, however, that, subject to the limitations of subsection (b) of this code section, a municipality or county which levies a general occupation or business license tax on a gross receipts basis shall have the power to levy and collect an occupation, license, or professional tax upon real estate brokers transacting business within the boundaries of the taxing jurisdiction, which tax shall be based upon gross receipts derived from transitions with respect to property located within the boundaries of a taxing jurisdiction. 
(m)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in the state, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of the business as defined in section 12-16. 
(n)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a sworn statement under oath and penalty of perjury, an affidavit form provided by the city, that the provided gross receipt information is true and correct as stated on the applicable income tax return of the business for the applicable year, less allowed exemptions. If no tax return has been filed for the applicable year, the applicant must swear under oath and penalty of perjury that no tax return has been filed for the applicable year, and the gross receipts as presented to the city are true and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge, ability and training based on financial documents such as CPA statement and/or the business's annual profit and loss statement. 
(o)  No portion of the tax may be prorated. 
(p)  For purposes of determining the number of employees of a business, trade, or practitioner, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime employee, and the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce fulltime position equivalence. For purposes of this section, the number of employees shall be the number of fulltime employees or fulltime position equivalence. 
(q)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees and gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article; or 
(2)  Four hundred dollars for the year 2014 and subsequent years, but a practitioner paying according to this shall not be required to provide information relating to the gross receipts of such practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-22. - Inspections of books and records. 
(a)  The city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records of any business for which applications have been based upon the number of employees and gross receipts. It shall be the responsibility of the person holding a license under this chapter to secure, preserve and keep reasonable records, including payments to subcontractor, the business license number of any subcontractors, W-2s, 1099s, rents received from tenants and box holders, and records containing the amount of sales receipts, and such records and any other documents reasonably requested by the business license supervisor shall be furnished upon demand to the supervisor of the business license office, or his authorized representative, for determining the proper classification of the business and for audit purposes to determine the correct amount of occupation taxes for the business. 
(b)  Upon demand of the city manager or designee, such books or records shall be submitted within 30 days for inspection by a representative or agent of the city. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed. Additionally, interest and penalties may be charged as provided by in this code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no attorney shall be required to disclose any information that would violate the attorney/client privilege. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(d)  Information provided to the city by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(e)  Every person, business and/or practitioner required to pay an occupation tax under the provisions of this article who leases or rents space to another person, business and/or practitioner operating within the city shall submit a list of such persons, businesses and/or practitioners upon request of the city within 15 days of such request. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or documents and items thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-23. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in tax. 
The governing authority may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in the occupation tax or a credit against an occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-24. - Each line of business to be identified. 
The occupation tax certificate of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. However, no business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered in writing with the city. This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-25. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
(a)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax, and the gross receipts of each will be returned on an affidavit furnished by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, the city is authorized to tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the city. 
(c)  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to a local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-26. - Paying tax of businesses with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-27. - Occupation tax certificate not transferable; changes. 
(a)  Occupation tax certificates are not transferable. 
(b)  Any person or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under this article moving from one location to another shall notify the city of this move and shall submit the new address in writing prior to the day of the moving and pay a $10.00 fee. A new certificate for the occupational tax will be issued for the new location provided the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city. 
(c)  Any person or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under this article changing its business name from one name to another shall notify the city of the name change in writing and include any and all applicable supporting documents, i.e., trade name registration, and pay a $10.00 fee. 
(d)  A change of ownership shall be considered in the same manner as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. The new owner must submit proof of the ownership change, i.e., bill of sale. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-28. - Failure to pay tax, file returns or permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part of such tax, upon failure to submit any of the required documents within the time required in this article, upon failure to submit a true application, required documents and affidavits, upon failure to amend an application, required documents and affidavit to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 12-22, the imposition of civil penalties may be pursued by the local government. This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-29. - Liability of officers and agents; occupation tax certificate required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary occupation tax certificate for such business as described in this article, and, in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a occupation tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the occupation tax certificate provided for in this section within 30 days of commencing the business. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-30. - Lien taken for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article, for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. The lien shall cover the property (in the city) of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for such tax. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city manager or designee upon the property of such defendant located in such jurisdiction. Sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-31. - Denial, revocation or suspension; appeals. 
(a)  An occupation tax certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he practices or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(2)  The applicant or certificate holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The applicant or certificate holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent he is unable to perform his duties under the business or occupation; 
(4)  The applicant or certificate holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The applicant or certificate holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, for a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of the application. If, after having been granted a certificate, the applicant pleads guilty, is convicted of, or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above offenses, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(6)  The original application, any supporting document, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(7)  Failure of the business to provide books and records for inspection within 30 days of a demand by the city manager or designee as provided for in section 12-22. 
(8)  The business or establishment is not authorized to operate within the city, or within the zoning district within which it is located, or is otherwise not in conformity with locational requirements of any of the city's ordinances; 
(9)  The applicant or licensee has failed to pay any fee to the city or county, has failed to make a return or pay a tax due to the tax commissioner of the county, or any other agency of the city or county government or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any other chapter of this Code of Ordinances. 
(10)  The business or establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(11)  The business or establishment has been found by a court of law to have been operating unlawfully; 
(12)  Any other violation of this article; or 
(13)  Violation of another statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation that governs the operation of the business in question. 
(b)  Within 45 days of the filing of a completed application, the city shall either issue an occupation tax certificate to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny an occupation tax certificate for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(13) of this section. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The written notice shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(c)  Should the city manager or designee find cause for one or more reasons set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(13) of this section for an occupation tax certificate to be suspended or revoked, the city manager or designee shall notify the occupation tax certificate holder by written notice of intent to suspend or revoke said occupation tax certificate. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall state the grounds for the suspension or revocation of said occupation tax certificate and notify the holder of the right to appeal said decision as designated in this section. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision under this article, the following procedure shall apply: a notice of appeal must be filed with the city manager or designee within 15 calendar days after receipt of the decision. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the city. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the city manager or designee shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The notice shall specify the time, place and date, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the date the notice is issued on which the mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall conduct a hearing on the city manager or designee's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the occupation tax certificate. Said hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the administrative hearing procedures as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(f)  The mayor and city council, or such hearing officer or board as the mayor and council may designate, shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five days after the hearing. If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke an occupation tax certificate, the decision shall become final unless the applicant or certificate holder files an appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the county superior court within 30 days of the date of the decision. In case of intent to deny, if the decision concludes that no grounds exist for denial, of the occupation tax certificate, the city shall, within three business days of the issuance of the decision, issue the occupation tax certificate to the applicant. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to attorneys in the practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-32. - Exemptions from article provisions; tax prohibited by law. 
(a)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(b)  Organizations which are exempt from federal income taxation under the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible for exemption from the city occupational tax. Any such organization claiming an exemption shall provide to the city a federal tax exemption letter showing the code section under which an exemption is claimed unless filing for exempt status with the IRS is not required (such as a church.) However, with respect to any activity for which an organization otherwise entitled to an exemption under this section shall be liable for federal income tax on unrelated business income or shall be deemed to be a feeder organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code, the exemption from payment of occupational taxes shall not be available. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, blind persons and disabled veterans may conduct business without paying an occupation tax. Any such person claiming an exemption shall secure evidence of qualification for the exemption from the proper authority and present it to the city. 
(d)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16(a)3. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355, i.e., businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
(12)  Motor vehicles regulated by the department of public safety pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16(a)1. 
(13)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-116. 
(14)  Non-profit agricultural co-ops governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(e)  An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-33. - Violation. 
Violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed an offense. The court with jurisdiction to enforce local government ordinances may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. This fine may not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26. This general penalty for violations of this Code shall not apply to violations of this article by lawyers. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-34. - Enforcement of article. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city manager or designee to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed. It is hereby made the further duty of the city manager or designee to inspect all occupation tax certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the certificate held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-35. - Conflicts between specific and general article provisions. 
It is the intent of the article to impose the taxes set forth in this article upon all businesses and practitioners operating in the city consistent with the requirements of the Constitution and laws of the state. In the event that the fees imposed hereby shall not be authorized on any business and practitioner, or taxes and fees shall be in excess of the maximum amount authorized by law, such taxes and fees shall be imposed only to the extent authorized by law. Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this section that the specific provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-36. - Article to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing authority. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the governing authority. This article may be amended only after the conduct of at least one public hearing pertaining thereto. All provisions relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Sec. 12-37. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The city manager or designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the Constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. 
(Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2015) 
Secs. 12-38—12-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FEES AND GROSS PREMIUM TAXES ON INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c); powers of municipal corporations to impose license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 12-53. - Insurers license fee. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Hiram, Georgia in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 12-54, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1996, § 18-81; Ord. No. 11-123, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-54. - License fee for life insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location. 
(Code 1996, § 18-82; Ord. No. 11-123, § 2, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-55. - Life insurance agency license fees; independent life insurance agencies and brokers not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 12-53, in an amount set forth in section 12-20. 
(Code 1996, § 18-83; Ord. No. 84-33, § 3, 11-7-1983) 
Sec. 12-56. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is an addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-53. 
(Code 1996, § 18-84; Ord. No. 11-123, § 3, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-57. - Same—Levied upon all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8-2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 12-53. 
(Code 1996, § 18-85; Ord. No. 11-123, § 4, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-58. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 12-53 and 12-54 shall be due and payable on January 1, of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 18-86; Ord. No. 11-123, § 5, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 12-59. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this article to the state insurance commissioner within 45 days of the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 11-123, § 6, 9-6-2011) 
Secs. 12-60—12-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 12-90. - Levied; rate; minimum tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1996, § 18-111; Ord. of 11-7-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 12-91. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts within the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 18-112; Ord. of 11-7-1983, § 2) 
Secs. 12-92—12-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNSHOPS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2013, repealed Art. V in its entirety and enacted a new Art V to read as set out herein. Former Art. V, §§ 12-111—12-121, 12-144—12-163, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1996, §§ 18-136—18-146, 18-167—18-183; Ord. of 7-1-1988, §§ 1—30. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal authority to license and regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-111. - Purpose and authority of article. 
(a)  This article is enacted in accordance with the plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of pawnshops or similar places where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn. 
(b)  This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-112. - License required. 
(a)  License required. No pawnshop or any other business engaging in pawn transactions or otherwise regulated by this article shall be commenced or continue to be operated except as provided by and in compliance with this article, including, but not limited to, obtaining a lawfully issued license. 
(b)  Any pawnshop or other business engaging in pawn transactions that is operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal violation hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such pawnshop and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a pawnshop contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any related license and occupation tax registration granted hereunder. 
(c)  Rules governing those engaged in business prior to article; deadline for application. All persons already engaging in a business regulated by this article shall file an application in accordance with the terms of this article no later than December 31 of the year in which it is enacted. If the city council shall determine that any such application filed pursuant to this subsection should be denied, the applicant may continue to operate the business during any appeal process if pursued; provided, however, that at all times during which such applicant continues to operate his business he shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this article. 
(d)  The provisions of this article are supplementary of the state law statutes and regulations governing pawnshops and pawn transaction. Compliance with all such state law requirements is required in addition to compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-113. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Accepted identification means an official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic-coated/sealed card, issued for purposes of identification or driver's license. These documents must be issued by one of the 50 states or a branch of the U.S. military, i.e., Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or current State of Georgia and counties of Georgia probation and parole cards. The identification must, at a minimum, bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth, description of the person, and an address for the person. 
Deceptive business practice means: 
(1)  Any use or possession of a false weight or measurement, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any scale or service; 
(2)  Any sale of, offer to sell or delivery of less than the represented quality or quantity; 
(3)  Any attempt to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity, when as buyer or broker, he furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Any service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
(5)  Any other practice designated as unlawful by O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.; 
(6)  Any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Interest in the license means exists if the person is the outright owner of the pawnshop; the applicant and/or licensee; a co-owner of the pawnshop; a partner in a partnership which owns all or part of the pawnshop; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the pawnshop. 
Licensee means the person or entity authorized to conduct and transact business in accordance with this article. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property or title (including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle title) as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale on default. 
Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, personal property or titles, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property or title on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property or title from persons or sources other than the manufacturers or regulated dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described herein. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a well-defined part of such business is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, motor vehicles, or any kind of personal property or title whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-114. - Violation of article. 
(a)  In addition to the licensee, any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be cited and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the general penalties described in section 1-12. 
(b)  The licensee(s) shall be responsible for violations of this article. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction of this state. Such actions may be maintained, notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-115. - Applications; contents; deadline for submission; fees. 
(a)  Any person(s) desiring to obtain a license required under this article shall make written application to the city manager through the city clerk for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such application shall require the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the applicant and the proposed licensee, if different than the applicant and a description of the nature and character of the business to be conducted. If the applicant or the proposed licensee is a partnership, the applicant must provide with the application the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all partners. If the applicant or the proposed licensee is a corporation, the applicant must provide with the application the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of the officers and stockholders with 20 percent or more ownership. 
(b)  At the time application is made, the applicant, on behalf of the proposed licensee, shall designate the person to be responsible for acceptance of service of any process, notice, violation, or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing, the city may require additional information to assist it in evaluating the request for a license. No application shall be completed and submitted by anyone under the age of 21. 
(d)  Applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records reasonably requested of them by the city and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall be considered abandonment of the application. 
(e)  At the time of application, the applicant shall certify for himself/herself and as the representative of the proposed licensee that they have read this article and agree to comply with its requirements. If the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this article on the premises. 
(f)  The application shall be made on an annual basis. 
(g)  Licensees shall immediately notify the city in writing through the city clerk of any change in any information, material or data furnished in connection with an application for a license, or of any material change in the type of business, ownership or qualifications of any licensee, applicant, or employee subsequent to license issuance. 
(h)  The initial license application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount of $100.00. Subsequent renewal applications shall be accompanied by a $50.00 renewal application fee. Application fees are not subject to refund. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-116. - Investigation of applicant; report by police department. 
Accompanying submission of all applications to the city as required by this article shall be executed consent forms authorizing the city to conduct background investigations, including criminal background investigations on each individual having an interest in the license. For the purpose of this section, in reference to corporations, consent forms will be initially required for stockholders that have at least 20 percent ownership in stock shares. All applications shall be investigated, and the police department shall provide its findings to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-117. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions prohibited; exception; pending. 
No license under this article shall be issued where any individual having an interest in the license shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony, misdemeanor or offense of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance related to moral turpitude, illegal gambling, theft, deception or fraudulent practices. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall not be considered. Provided, however, that any such offense shall be considered and be deemed disqualifying where the applicant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. Where the violation is for a misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, or violation of a municipal or county ordinance, the city council may, upon denial on such a basis and upon appeal, consider waiving such violation as a disqualification. No license shall be issued so long as there are outstanding criminal warrants, criminal charges, accusations or indictments for any of the crimes enumerated in this section on which there has been no final disposition or adjudication, and any application involving such pending charges shall be held for final decision until final disposition or adjudication of the charges. No license to operate a pawnshop that deals in firearms shall be issued to any convicted felon, unless that person's right to possess firearms has been verifiably reinstated in the jurisdiction where the conviction occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-118. - Disqualification of applicant(s); licensees. 
No license under this article shall be granted where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  An applicant or proposed licensee has had any pawnbroker license issued by a municipality, county, or other governmental entity previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)  An applicant or proposed licensee, while a holder of a previous license to operate a pawnshop in any jurisdiction, has been convicted of violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application, or, within the same time period, has any disqualifying conviction under section 12-117. 
(3)  An applicant or proposed licensee has failed to comply with any other requirements of any local, state, or federal law prescribed for the operation of the business contemplated by the license sought. 
(4)  An applicant or proposed licensee has supplied false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to his application. 
(5)  An applicant or proposed licensee has failed to pay any fee due to the city or county or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  An applicant or proposed licensee, during the 12-month period immediately preceding the filing of his application, has been determined by a competent court or administrative agency of having engaged in a deceptive business practice. 
(7)  In addition to subsections (1) through (6) of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
a.  If any applicant or proposed licensee is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business under such license as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
b.  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
c.  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of and the place for which that license is sought. 
d.  Whether and the extent to which the applicant or proposed licensee is presented as or engaged in a ruse or scheme to procure a license for a person or entity not otherwise eligible for a license. 
(8)  No more than five such business establishments are permissible within the city; provided, however, that if such a business establishment ceases operation, the maximum number of such permissible business establishments within the city is reduced correspondingly, and no additional business establishment is permissible if the number of such business establishments then in operation exceeds a threshold of one such licensed business establishment for each 2,000 citizens in the city plus one additional license for any fractional figure exceeding the 2,000 citizen population threshold. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-119. - Consideration by city manager. 
(a)  If the background investigation, including the criminal investigation, do not disclose disqualifying information or any other information requiring denial of the license and all other requirements for licensing are satisfied, then the city manager shall issue the license. 
(b)  If the city manager determines that the license should be denied, then the city manager shall inform the proposed licensee, in writing, that the application is denied, providing a description in reasonable detail of the reasons for the denial and notifying the proposed licensee of the right to appeal. 
(c)  Such appeal shall be before the city council in accordance with section 12-120 of this article. An appeal must be requested in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within ten business days of the date of the denial notice. An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that such meeting is no less than 15 days from the date the written request for an appeal is filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-120. - Appeal hearings. 
(a)  Written notice of date, time, and place of the hearing on an appeal of denial of a license shall be provided to the proposed licensee, provided that the proposed licensee shall be provided no less than 15 days' notice of the hearing. 
(b)  At the hearing, the proposed licensee shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and to present evidence, including witness testimony, in support of any contention that the denial is unwarranted or is otherwise inconsistent with the requirements of this article or any other provision of law. The proposed licensee is entitled to be represented by counsel at the hearing who may argue for and present the case of the proposed licensee. 
(c)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine whether to sustain the decision of the city manager, reverse the decision of the city manager, or reverse the decision of the city manager but imposing conditions to be satisfied by the proposed licensee. The decision of the city council is final, subject to appeal to the Superior Court of Paulding County by way of a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-121. - Revocation and suspension of licenses—Generally. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the city manager may, for due cause, suspend, revoke, or place on probation, with or without conditions, any license issued under this article. 
(b)  Due cause for the revocation, suspension, or imposition of probationary status shall consist of any of the following: 
(1)  A licensee commits a deceptive business practice that consists of: 
a.  Using or possessing a false weight or measure, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any sale or service; 
b.  Selling, offering, exposing for sale, or delivering less than the represented quality or quantity; 
c.  Taking or attempting to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity when as buyer or broker the licensee furnishes the weight or measure; 
d.  Providing a service which is of any unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
e.  Engaging in any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the state; 
f.  Commission of any of the foregoing by any person employed or otherwise utilized in transacting the business of the licensee; or 
g.  Any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication, oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the licensee deals in pursuance of the licensee's business. The term "misrepresentation of fact," as used in this subsection, shall embrace not only express misrepresentations but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the licensee's conduct, including acts and omissions. 
(2)  Violation of any laws, ordinances, or resolutions regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to the authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business. 
(3)  Providing false information to the city in support of the application for a license or any renewal thereof or in response to any of the reporting requirements imposed by this article, regardless of when the city shall have become aware of such false information. 
(4)  Failure to comply with any other requirements of any local, state, or federal law prescribed for the operation of the business contemplated by the license sought as well as any other local, state, or federal law applicable to the business operation, including, but not limited to, the acts or practices declared unlawful by the State Fair Business Practices Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-390 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time or declared unlawful by the administrator of the Act pursuant to regulations issued under Section 4 of the Act, all subject to the exemptions in Section 6 of the Act. 
(5)  Failing to comply with any provisions of this article. 
(6)  The licensee has lost qualifications required by this article. 
(c)  Upon determining that a license issued under this article should be suspended, revoked or placed on probation with or without conditions, the city manager shall inform the licensee in writing of that tentative decision and provide a description of the reason(s) why the action should be taken. The licensee shall be given seven business days to meet with the city manager to review and consider the situation, including the action proposed by the city manager. The licensee will be informed in writing of the city manager's final action within three business days of such meeting. The writing shall describe the reason(s) for the city manager's action(s) and notify the licensee of a right to appeal the action to the city council. A licensee's failure to meet with the city manager within the seven-day window constitutes a waiver of the right to so meet and any rights attendant to such a meeting and the notice of the city manager's tentative decision shall serve as the city manager's final action. 
(d)  An appeal must be requested in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within ten business days of the date of the written notice of the city manager's final action. An appeal shall be scheduled for a hearing before the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, provided that such meeting is no less than 15 days from the date the written request for an appeal is filed with the city clerk. All appeal hearings are governed by and subject to the provisions of section 12-120. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-122. - Transfers. 
Licenses issued for operation of a business establishment subject to this article are not transferable. Any person or business entity acquiring ownership or control otherwise of an already existing and operating business establishment may not operate the business without first complying with all of the requirements of this article as if a new licensee and receiving a license from the city except that if the business establishment was not required by law to have a special use permit, no special use permit shall be required of the new licensee unless the new licensee intends to relocate the business operation to a new location in the city. If at any time the business establishment licensed by the city ceases operation, the provisions of subsection 12-118(8) may preclude re-establishing the business operation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-123. - To be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses must be retrieved in person at city hall at which time all regulatory fees shall be paid. No license shall be effective until all regulatory fees have been paid. If retrieval and payment of the regulatory fees is not accomplished within two weeks from the date of the approval of the application, the application and any license otherwise to be issued in response to the application shall be deemed abandoned and void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city clerk's office the required fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, the license shall be issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-124. - Renewal. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article or any predecessor provisions of a city ordinance shall be renewed annually. Renewal requires compliance with all provisions of this article. All licensees shall apply for the renewal of any existing license and pay the renewal application fee and annual regulatory fee no later than February 1 of each calendar year in which business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-125. - Annual fee to be set by city council; refunds. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any license under this article, payment of an annual regulatory fee shall be required. 
(b)  The annual regulatory fee shall be $250.00. 
(c)  All licenses shall be issued for the calendar year beginning January 1, and the fees prescribed by the city council shall be paid in full by each person prior to issuance of a license. 
(d)  Any license issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year for which it is issued. 
(e)  In case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(f)  The regulatory fee shall be prorated by 50 percent for any business commenced after June 30 of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-126. - Authorizes conduct of one place of business. 
Each license under this article shall authorize the conduct of one place of business only, and persons doing business in more than one place within the city shall obtain a separate license, paying a separate fee, for each such place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-127. - Change of location. 
(a)  The business authorized by a license may be relocated to another address subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The licensee shall advise the city clerk in writing of the proposed relocation and the new address at which business is proposed to be transacted; 
(2)  If a special use permit is required for the proposed new location of the business, the special use permit must be obtained prior to any relocation and transaction of business at the new address. If a special use permit is required and not obtained, then the business may not relocate; and 
(3)  Operation of the business at the new location is otherwise compliant with the city's zoning regulations. 
(b)  If relocation is permitted, a new business license for the new business location shall be issued upon payment of a fee in an amount to be set by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-128. - Display. 
All licenses issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business authorized by the license. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-129. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; abandonment for non-use. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this article must, within 30 days after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the 30-day period shall constitute abandonment of the license, voiding the license, and rendering unlawful any effort to transact business pursuant to such license. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this article who commences operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of 30 days thereafter cease to operate the business authorized in the license shall be deemed to have abandoned the license, voiding the license, and rendering unlawful any effort to transact business thereafter pursuant to such license. 
(c)  No refund of application or regulatory license fees shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-130. - Constitutes grant or privilege. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article are a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and any other ordinance, resolution or law of the city, county, state or United States relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked or suspended by the city in accordance with such procedures as adopted by the city." 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-131. - Penalties for failure to obtain or failure to gain permission to transfer. 
If any person or entity fails to apply for and obtain a license as required by this article, then, in addition to any other remedy available under this article or other applicable law, the person or entity is liable to the city for a penalty equal to ten percent of the regulatory fee which shall be imposed for each period of 30 days or portion thereof during which the person or entity unlawfully transacts business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-132. - Collection of unpaid fees. 
Upon the failure to pay any regulatory fee as required by this article, any such fee is subject to collection in the manner as provided for the collection of taxes, regardless of the provisions of this article for penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-133. - Void licenses. 
Any license issued in violation of any provision or requirement of this article or any other applicable legal requirement is void. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Secs. 12-134—12-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS OPERATION 

Sec. 12-162. - Employee regulations. 
(a)  Every person who works in a pawnshop is required to have a permit issued by the city. No permit shall be issued unless the person satisfies the requirements in this section or as otherwise required by the article. The permit required by this section expires annually on the date established generally for the business license of the pawnshop, and each person is required to renew their permit by that date. The permit required by this section must be in the possession of the person while performing services at the pawnshop or elsewhere on behalf of the licensee and must be available for inspection. For purposes of this section "person" includes, but is not limited to, employees, the licensee and, if a corporation, its officers, directors, and shareholders and, if a partnership, its partners, as well as the designated responsible person. It is the duty of the licensee to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  No licensee shall allow any person to work on the premises or undertake work on behalf of the licensee unless the person has in his or her possession a current, valid city permit, and licensees are required to inspect and verify that each such person has in his or her possession a valid, current pawnshop permit. 
(b)  The following must be provided in connection with seeking a permit: 
(1)  A completed and signed application filed with the chief of police or his designee. The application shall, at a minimum, require the applicant's name, residential address, telephone number, email address, social security number, date of birth, and a description of the applicant's prior arrest record that shall only be used for investigative purposes and shall not give rise to a presumption or inference of guilt. The applicant must also provide proof of identify at the time of submitting the application, and only official, government-issued, photo identification is acceptable (e.g., driver's license, passport, military card, or state identification card). The city may from time to time require additional information of applicants; 
(2)  A SAVE affidavit, a secure and verifiable document and immigration documents (if applicable) indicating the applicant is a U.S. citizen or otherwise qualified alien; 
(3)  A signed consent form authorizing the chief of police or his designee to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant. The chief of police or his designee shall conduct a complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the applicant; and 
(4)  Payment of an administrative fee in an amount of $25.00. 
(c)  Persons are ineligible for a permit if: 
(1)  They have been convicted of or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any misdemeanor crimes involving theft, deception or fraudulent practices within ten years preceding the date of application. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall not be considered. Provided, however, that any such offense shall be considered and be deemed disqualifying where the applicant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender; 
(2)  They are subject to outstanding criminal warrants, criminal charges, accusations or indictments for any of the crimes enumerated in this section on which there has been no final disposition or adjudication whereupon any application involving such pending charges shall be held for a final decision until final disposition or adjudication of the charges; 
(3)  For purposes of working in or on behalf of a pawnshop that deals in firearms, a person must be eligible under then prevailing state law to possess a firearm, and the person must retain eligibility throughout employment in accordance with state law as it may be amended from time to time; 
(4)  If it is determined that they falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the City for a permit under this section. No permit shall be deemed effective absent compliance with this provision, and a failure to comply constitutes abandonment of and voids the application and permit sought; 
(5)  They have previously violated any provision of this article; or 
(6)  They are a city employee who is directly involved in the licensing, permitting, and regulation of pawnshops. 
(d)  In the event the applicant satisfies the criteria established in this section and may otherwise be applicable in this article, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the applicant that a permit has been issued. The applicant must make himself or herself available, within one week of notification, to the chief of police or his designee for photographing for the purpose of issuing the permit. 
(e)  If the permit is denied, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing with a description of the reason(s) for the denial and informing the applicant of the right to appeal the denial to the city manager. Any appeal to the city manager must be presented in writing to the city clerk within ten days of the date of the written denial, and the document filed with the city clerk must provide an explanation by the applicant of the reason for the appeal. Within ten days the city manager shall inform the applicant in writing whether the denial is upheld or reversed. The decision of the city manager is final, subject to review in the Superior Court of Paulding County by way of a petition for a writ of certiorari in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(f)  Any permit issued in contravention of this section, article, or any other applicable provision of law is void and may be revoked and seized by the chief of police or his designee, subject to appeal rights as provided in subsection 12-162(e) of this article. 
(g)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the police department and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the city police department. 
(h)  Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of the original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for pawnshop permits. After 30 days of the original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-163. - Reporting requirement for employee information. 
Twice annually, during the month of June and again during the month of December, the licensee must file with the chief of police or his designee, a document identifying the name of the establishment and its address, the occupation tax certificate number, and all persons conducting or transacting business on behalf of the licensee along with each such person's date of birth, Social Security Number, residential address and telephone number, and email address. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-164. - Adding merchandise to stock. 
(a)  A 51 percent majority of pawned or pledged merchandise must be maintained in inventory for sale at all times if a licensee is also selling new merchandise. 
(b)  A licensee must maintain a documented, objective, and verifiable record of the retail value of all new merchandise made available for sale as well as for the pawned or pledged merchandise made available for sale. The city reserves the right to inspect these records for purposes of determining compliance. 
(c)  A licensee is prohibited from operating its business on the same premises as a business that sells, deals in, exchanges, markets, or handles new goods, wares, or merchandise, and a licensee is prohibited from permitting or otherwise allowing any other business operation on the licensee's premises. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-165. - Articles not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition. 
Any licensee who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least 30 days before disposing of such goods by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute an offense, punishable according to section 12-114. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-166. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful to receive in pawn, pledge or sale goods of any character or description from a minor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-167. - Sale of knives, blackjacks and other weapons. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or expose for sale any kind of metal knucks, dirks, sword-in-canes, spears, Bowie knives, switchblade knives, or any blackjacks or similar weapons. Violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 12-114. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-168. - Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
(a)  In the public interest and as set forth herein, licensees shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. The records shall provide accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such descriptions shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The licensee shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(b)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the licensee shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(c)  The licensee shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(d)  The licensee shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction, including the amount loaned/paid and any check number written for payment. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(e)  There shall be no erasures or blanks on any of the documentation required by this section. Corrections shall be marked through with a solid line and signed by the employee or other person acting on behalf of the licensee making the correction. 
(f)  The licensee is required to photograph the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall be taken with a digital camera at the time of the transaction. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnshop transaction number. The digital photograph shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that it is safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(g)  The licensee shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact fingerprinted. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(h)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted unless the customer can supply to the licensee at the time of the transaction a copy of the original sales receipt or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase. In lieu of the original receipt or proof of purchase, a confirmation of ownership form may be accepted at the licensee's risk. The licensee shall retain the receipt, proof of purchase, or confirmation of ownership on file. 
(i)  The licensee shall store the records required in this section, including all digital images and fingerprints, for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 12-169. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Contents of daily report. 
(1)  Every pawnshop shall prepare a daily report in writing for the police department, in such form as may be prescribed by the police department or any designated agent, of all property that has been the subject of a pawn transaction during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such report shall be computer generated, typewritten or printed legibly. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the report shall show: 
a.  The name and address of the licensee; 
b.  Time of transaction; 
c.  Serial number of pawn tickets; 
d.  Amount paid or advanced; 
e.  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, marks and numbers; and 
f.  A description of persons pledging, selling or pawning, including name, address, driver's license number, weight and height. 
(2)  Serial numbers on items with serial numbers must be included in this report. Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any licensee or representative of licensee making such report shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable according to the provisions of section 1-12. The daily report shall be in such form and contain such information as may be required by the police chief or by his designated agent, and sufficient information to identify each of such articles. Any person subject to this article, any licensee or employee of a licensee, who shall fail or refuse to prepare and keep reports as provided in this section or shall make false entries concerning the transactions named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection or examination by any police officer of the reports and of the property pledged or sold to licensee shall be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(b)  The report shall be signed and dated by the licensee, if an individual, or by the responsible person, if a corporate or other business entity. The licensee, as well as the person signing the daily report, is responsible for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of the report. 
(c)  The failure of any licensee or representative of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2013) 
Secs. 12-170—12-191. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGING, AND ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 12-192. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is declared the purpose and the intent of the city that an excise tax be levied upon any room or rooms, lodgings and accommodations furnished for value within the city and that said funds be made available for the purpose of promoting, attracting, stimulating and developing tourism within the city and for the provision of other city services. 
(b)  The city does hereby levy and impose an excise tax of five percent upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.1) 
Sec. 12-193. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be as defined herein: 
City means the City of Hiram, Georgia, and variously, the incorporated territory of the city, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City manager means the duly appointed city manager or his designee. 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax and the method of payment. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any guestroom or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.2) 
Sec. 12-194. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guestroom in any hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of any rent unless an exemption is provided under section 12-197. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.3) 
Sec. 12-195. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guestrooms in this city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 12-197. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.4) 
Sec. 12-196. - Proceeds of tax; expenditure. 
(a)  Proceeds of the tax. The proceeds of the tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(b)  Expenditure of proceeds. 
(1)  A portion of the taxes collected shall be paid to the county chamber of commerce or any other entity or organization allowable under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-41 and as may be amended in the future pursuant to a contract with same, and expended for the purposes of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows in the city. In this regard, the county chamber of commerce must spend such monies on planning, conducting or participating in programs of information and publicity designed to attract or advertise tourism, conventions or trade shows in the city. The portions to be paid to the county chamber of commerce shall be as follows: An amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes collected under this article exceed the taxes which would have been collected at a rate of three percent; 
(2)  Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the county chamber of commerce shall provide to the governing authority a budget detailing the proposed expenditure of the funds provided under this article. Such budget, after being approved by the governing authority, shall be made a part of the budget for the city; 
(3)  The county chamber of commerce shall provide to the governing authority audit verification that the county chamber of commerce has made use of the funds in conformity with the proposed budget and the general purpose of this article. The county chamber of commerce shall also complete a department of community affairs hotel/motel tax report and project/contractor information schedule. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.5) 
Sec. 12-197. - Exemption. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official of employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.6) 
Sec. 12-198. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk, on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city manager. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.7) 
Sec. 12-199. - Determination generally; returns, payments. 
(a)  Due dates of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city manager. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city manager. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less the 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.8) 
Sec. 12-200. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city manager or his designee is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, the city manager or his designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination as provided by this Code and under state law. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city manager or his designee shall give to the operator written notice of the manager's determination. The notice served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.9) 
Sec. 12-201. - Determination if no return made; unsatisfactory return. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city manager or his designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city manager. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in this Code and under state law. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by this Code and under state law. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.10) 
Sec. 12-202. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city manager or his designee may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fee and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city manager or his designee either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the governing authority. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city manager or his designee, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the governing authority, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.11) 
Sec. 12-203. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city manager. The city manager or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city manager or his designee may prescribe, and in such form as the clerk may require. Said records shall at times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city manager or his designee shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city manager or his designee or any person authorized in writing by the manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager or his designee may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city manager may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.12) 
Sec. 12-204. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city manager, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 2-4-2008, § 18-114.13) 
Secs. 12-205—12-231. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POOLROOMS OR BILLIARD ROOMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments power to license, regulate, and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 12-232. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage, beer and malt beverage, fortified wine, wine and distilled spirits or spirituous liquor as defined in section 6-1 of chapter 6, pertaining to alcoholic beverages, which definitions are incorporated in this article by reference. 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made or any form of consideration is required or tendered for use of equipment. (O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1) 
Billiards or pool means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and includes all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," and "English billiards." (O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-1, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-233. - Sanitation requirements. 
All public billiard rooms shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition and shall comply with all sanitary rules and regulations of the state, the county, and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-2, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-234. - Use of obstructions and enclosures. 
No person who operates a billiard room in the city shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures. However, this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes or the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-3, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-235. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room within the city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-4, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-236. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age to billiard rooms in which alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a billiard room in which beer, wine, malt beverage, distilled spirits, spirituous liquor, fortified wine, or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. This subsection shall not apply to persons under 18 years of age who are accompanied by a parent or guardian. However, no minor shall be allowed in billiard rooms between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  In the event that the proprietor of a billiard room is of the opinion that any person desiring admission thereto is under the age of 18 years, he shall require such person to certify his age by producing a legal permit/identification. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-5, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-237. - Posting of placard as to admission of minors. 
Every licensee under this chapter shall post in the room where billiard tables are operated a placard with the language of section 12-236 conspicuously written thereon for the information of the patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-6, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-238. - Gambling; posting of sporting results; sale or use of intoxicating liquors/alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No dice, cards, dominoes, or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any billiard room or in any other business place operated in connection therewith; and such games as Kelly pool, keno, pigeon pool, Parker pool, star pool, scrub, and similar gambling devices are prohibited. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such place of business. The use of baseball tickers and the posting results of sporting events are expressly prohibited in billiard rooms or in any place operated in connection therewith. 
(b)  Billiard room operators that are licensed to serve malt beverages, beer, wine, fortified wine, distilled spirits, spirituous liquor, and/or alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinances and restrictions of the state, the city, and/or the county. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages, malt beverage, beer, wine, fortified wine, distilled spirits, and/or spirituous liquor shall be sold, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of billiard rooms or any place operated in connection therewith, unless such premises or establishment is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, malt beverage, beer, wine, fortified wine, distilled spirits and/or spirituous liquor. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-7, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-239. - Applicability of article to billiard tables and billiard room operated by religious orders, charitable institutions and clubs. 
This article shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns or associations, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county, or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-8, 7-3-2012) 
Sec. 12-240. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who has not reached the age of 18 who remains in a billiard room in the city or within prohibited hours or without being accompanied by a parent or guardian in accordance with section 12-236, who makes a false certificate as to age shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any licensee, person, firm or corporation who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense. Each violation thereof shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. All violations shall be heard and adjudicated in the municipal court of the city and any final decision of the municipal court of the city may be appealed in writing to the superior court of the county by certiorari within 30 days from the date of any final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 12-9, 7-3-2012) 
Secs. 12-241—12-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITING 

Sec. 12-271. - Permit required. 
Any nonprofit person, firm, association, corporation or organization desiring to solicit or canvass upon public areas or to call from house to house in the city for the purpose of raising funds or seeking donations for any religious, charitable or eleemosynary organization shall register with, and obtain a written permit from the chief of police. 
Sec. 12-272. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any nonprofit person, firm, association, corporation or organization desiring a permit to solicit or canvass upon public areas or to call from house to house in the city shall file, on a form to be supplied by the chief of police, an application stating the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent residence address; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of employer, firm, corporation or organization represented; 
(4)  Names and address of all persons assisting in the solicitation, canvassing or calling from house to house in the city; and 
(5)  Nature of any merchandise, wares, goods or any similar items to be sold or offered for sale or given away in conjunction with the solicitation, canvassing or calling from house to house in the city. 
(b)  Proof of tax-exempt status shall be required when registering with the chief of police. 
Sec. 12-273. - Nonprofit organization defined. 
No organization shall be considered a nonprofit organization within the meaning of this article except a tax-exempt organization within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law as such code and such law are now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 12-274. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Solicitation, canvassing and collecting is expressly prohibited in public streets, or from occupants of vehicles on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article to conduct any business transaction in any area which is within 35 feet of any street, alley, road or highway. 
Sec. 12-275. - Issuance of permit; identity card. 
Upon proper registration with and payment of such administrative fee as fixed from time to time by the governing authority to the chief of police, a written permit shall be issued to be valid for a period of 14 days from the date of issuance. A permit shall not be issued more frequently than every three months. In addition, an identifying letter shall be issued by the city and a photograph made which must be carried by all persons while engaged in solicitation, or canvassing upon public areas or calling from house to house in the city. 
Sec. 12-276. - Regulations governing activities. 
Solicitation or canvassing upon public areas or calling from house to house in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  All solicitation, calling or canvassing from house to house in the city shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
(2)  The number of solicitors or canvassers or callers from house to house in the city for any single firm, corporation or organization shall not exceed five in number at any one time. 
(3)  Immediately prior to any solicitation of funds within the city, each solicitor, canvasser or caller shall present his or her identity card, issued by the chief of police, to each person solicited and request each person solicited to read such identity card. Each solicitor or canvasser must inform each person solicited, in clear language, of the nature and purpose of the solicitation, and name and home or national office headquarters of the firm, corporation or organization represented. Each solicitor, canvasser or caller must inform each person solicited as to any minimum donation required for the acceptance of any merchandise, wares, goods or any similar items given by each solicitor, canvasser or called prior to such acceptance by each person solicited. 
Sec. 12-277. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or caller to do any of the following: 
(1)  To falsely represent, directly or by implication, that funds being solicited are on behalf of any person, firm, corporation, association or organization other than such registered with the chief of police; 
(2)  To solicit, canvass or call without the express prior permission of any occupant or property owner at any residence, apartment complex, or shopping mall where there is posted a sign forbidding such activity; 
(3)  To remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises; or 
(4)  To continue solicitation after being refused upon public areas; such action shall constitute harassment. 
Sec. 12-278. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Secs. 12-279—12-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Disabled veteran and blind peddlers exempt from occupation taxes and administrative fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; persons selling agricultural products exempted form from permit requirements, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 12-301. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for a peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined below to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-302. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser or solicitor means any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Peddler includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The term "peddler" shall include the terms "hawker" and "huckster." 
Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engaged in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm, or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
Sec. 12-303. - Application. 
Applicants for permits under this article must file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Address; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification; 
(7)  If a fixed location is o be used, the address and specific location within such address; and 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance involving theft, deception or injury to persons, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
Sec. 12-304. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall, upon receipt of payment of the prescribed permit fee, deliver to the applicant his permit. The chief shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(d)  Upon proper registration with the city, a written permit shall be issued which will be valid for a period of 14 days from the date of issuance. Additionally, a permit shall not be issued more frequently than every six months. 
Sec. 12-305. - Fees; bond; insurance. 
(a)  The permit fee which shall be charged by the city for such permit shall be as fixed from time to time by the governing authority, provided that no fee shall be charged to farmers engaged in direct sales of produce or other farm products produced on their own farms. 
(b)  All applicants under this article, except those conducting sales of seasonal items and sales at special events, shall, simultaneously with paying the fee called for herein, give proof of a surety bond conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all ordinances of the city and laws regulating the licensee's operation, and guaranteeing to any person or entity that all money paid by such person or entity will be accounted for and applied according to the representation of the licensee. Such bond shall issue in an amount of not less than $1,000.00 by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall run in favor of the city, but action may be taken on the bond by any person or entity who has suffered any damages as a result of the agent's actions. Any bond required by this section shall continue in force as to the surety so long as the agent holds a valid license under this article and for not less than one year from the date that the agent no longer holds a valid license under this article. 
(c)  All applicants under this article, except those conducting sales of seasonal items and sales at special events, shall provide proof of general liability insurance including products liability and property damage in the amount of $500,000.00 combined single limit. A certificate of insurance and a blanket or specific endorsement shall be delivered to the city manager prior to the issuance of a license and shall name as additional insureds the city and its employees regarding any liabilities that may arise in connection with the operations of the applicant. 
Sec. 12-306. - Exhibition of permits. 
(a)  Itinerant merchants. The permit issued hereunder for itinerant merchants and dealers and transient merchants shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said permit shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate permits may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(b)  Peddlers. Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen. 
Sec. 12-307. - Transfer. 
No permit or badge issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
Sec. 12-308. - Use of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article to conduct any business transaction in any area that is within 35 feet of any street, alley, road or highway. 
Sec. 12-309. - Revocation of permits. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on any business contemplated hereunder; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting any business contemplated hereunder, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
Sec. 12-310. - Regulation of hours. 
All activity regulated hereunder shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
Sec. 12-311. - Door-to-door activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to make a call at any residence where the owner or any person residing therein has posted a sign reading as follows: 
NO SOLICITORS 
without the express prior permission of the occupant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to fail to immediately leave the premises of any person when requested to do so. 
Sec. 12-312. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Secs. 12-313—12-350. - Reserved 
ARTICLE X. - STATEWIDE CABLE, VIDEO, UTILITY AND/OR TELEVISION FRANCHISES 

Sec. 12-351. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The governing authority has the responsibility to provide for the public health, safety and welfare by the control and efficient adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived within the city which includes the responsibility to provide for franchise fees for utilities, cable, and/or other television, video providers/services and/or other services within the city. 
(b)  The city considers collecting a franchise fee from a cable or video provider utilizing the public rights-of-way as compensation to the public for the use of the rights-of-way and a means of promoting the public health, safety, welfare and economic development of the city and to protect public works infrastructure. 
(c)  The city is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq., known as the "Consumer Choice for Television Act" of 2007, to collect a franchise fee of up to five percent, the maximum amount established by federal and state law, of each cable or video provider's gross revenues generated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-55, intro. ¶, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 12-352. - Statewide cable/video franchise fees. 
(a)  The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(b)  The city hereby authorizes the mayor, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of any existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city's limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 09-55, § 4-1.1, 7-14-2009) 
Secs. 12-353—12-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 12-381. - Garage sales and rummage sales. 
(a)  Sales commonly known as garage sales or rummage sales, conducted on residential property, shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  These sales shall be conducted only by the owner or tenant of the residential property used. 
(2)  Such sales shall be allowed a maximum of two times during a calendar year on one residential lot. No such sales shall be conducted for a longer period than 72 hours consecutively. 
(3)  No wares, goods, or merchandise shall be advertised or offered for sale, or swap, or given away, except goods, wares, and merchandise owned by the property owner or the tenant conducting the sale. 
(4)  No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be purchased by the owner or tenant for the purpose of selling, swapping, or giving away same at such a sale. 
(5)  Any person desiring to conduct such a sale shall notify the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon of the day preceding the sale. The city clerk or his authorized representative shall issue a permit to the person to conduct a sale upon the payment of a permit fee as fixed from time to time by the governing authority if the applicant otherwise meets the requirements of this section. This fee shall be in lieu of any other fees or business taxes in this Code. 
(6)  Sales for religious and charitable purposes shall be exempt from the payment of a permit fee, but shall register with the city at least 48 hours prior to the sale and shall comply with all other provisions of this section; provided that goods owned by a member of such organization and donated to such sale shall satisfy the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale or rummage sale without first obtaining a permit as described herein, or in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of this section, and the city manager is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Each yard sale may erect a maximum of three signs, one on the property where the sale is to occur and two additional signs for directional purposes. All such signs shall be erected only on private property with the approval of the owner or occupant of that property. 
Secs. 12-382—12-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MASSAGE/SPA ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-400. - Purpose and intent. 
In the interest of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public as expressed in the Charter, it is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of massage and spa establishments, and to regulate employees of such establishments who are not licensed as massage therapists by the state, pursuant to the authority expressed in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22(a) and the Charter section 1.3(b)35. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying for a license to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment, as defined herein, or a person applying for a work permit, as provided for herein. 
Employee means any person who performs any service on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluido-therapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure when performed by a person who is licensed by the state to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry or medicine. This term shall not include touching of the scalp or ears while providing a haircut, or touching of the hands or feet while providing a manicure or pedicure, by a person licensed by the Georgia State Board of Cosmetology. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means a commercial establishment where any person offers or provides massage. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments, facilities, chiropractic offices or businesses separately licensed as such by the state. 
Premises means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage establishment or spa establishment is located including, but not limited to, the establishment and the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages under the ownership or control of the establishment. 
Spa establishment means a commercial establishment that offers or engages in personal services that call for the patron to disrobe, such as body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments, facilities or businesses separately licensed as such by the state. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes: 
(a)  Illegal gambling. 
(b)  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, sodomy, aggravated sodomy, rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency. 
(c)  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance. 
(d)  Any offense related to any massage establishment or spa establishment, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity. 
(e)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one of the foregoing offenses. 
(f)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Georgia, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
(g)  Ordinance violation relating to the operation of a massage/spa establishment. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-402. - Penalty. 
In addition to the licensee, any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be cited and shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in the general penalties described in section 1-12. The licensee(s) shall be responsible for violations of this article. The violation of the provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction of this state. Such actions may be maintained, notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city council. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-403. - Scope of regulations. 
All licenses and work permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to operate or work at the establishment specified in the license or work permit during the term of the license or work permit only, and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 12-404. - Massage/spa establishment license required; application. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment license required. It shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment license or exemption therefrom. 
(b)  Rules governing those engaged in business prior to article; deadline for application. All persons already engaging in a business regulated by this article shall file an application in accordance with the terms of this article no later than December 1 of the year in which it is enacted. If the city council shall determine that any such application filed pursuant to this subsection should be denied, the applicant may continue to operate the business during any appeal process if pursued; provided, however, that at all times during which such applicant continues to operate the business the applicant shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this article. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment license shall file in person with the city. The application must be executed by the person primarily responsible for the operation of the establishment, to be the named licensee. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, the application must also be executed by an officer, member, partner or shareholder, if applicable, to be a named licensee. Signatures on the application shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the information and/or items required in this subsection, accompanied by a non-refundable administrative fee of $50.00: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1, along with a secure and verifiable document as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2, and, if applicable, proof of lawful presence in the United States. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity, a signed and sworn affidavit verifying the lawful presence of each person that executes the application on behalf of the applicant, along with a secure and verifiable document and, if applicable, proof of lawful presence in the United States, is required. 
(3)  A signed and sworn affidavit attesting that the applicant either uses the federal work authorization program in accordance with federal regulations or that the applicant employs fewer than 11 people or otherwise does not fall within the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6. 
(4)  Current business address and residential mailing address for the applicant. 
(5)  The business name, location, legal description, mailing address, phone number, and hours of operation of the establishment. 
(6)  If the applicant is a sole proprietor, written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. 
(7)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor, then the partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity shall submit a complete list of the legal entities: 
a.  Officers. 
b.  Directors. 
c.  Partners, members, or shareholders (natural persons) holding a ten percent or greater ownership interest in such legal entity, or if there is no shareholder (natural person) with at least a ten percent interest, the ten shareholders with the greatest ownership interest. 
d.  Employee or agent primarily responsible for operation of the massage or spa establishment. 
e.  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government for each person listed in subparts a. through d. above. 
(8)  Names of all individuals having a financial interest in the business. Financial interest shall include guaranteeing a lease obligation. 
(9)  Ten years of work history for the applicant and any person listed in response to subsections (c)7 and (c)8. 
(10)  Ten years of residential history for the applicant and any person listed in response to subsections (c)7 and (c)8. 
(11)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (c)7 or (c)8 has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, employee, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(12)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (c)7 or (c)8 has been charged with, arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such violation, arrest and/or conviction. 
(13)  A statement of whether the applicant or any person listed in response to subsection (c)7 or (c)8 has had their state-issued massage therapy license suspended, revoked or placed on probation, and if so, the state which issued the license, license number, summary of why, and summary of the action taken against the license. 
(14)  A sworn and notarized statement of a registered agent who is a resident of Paulding County, Georgia and at least 18 years of age, required to be designated by a licensee to receive any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the applicant. 
(15)  A statement whether the applicant is the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. If the applicant is a lease holder, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with the license application. 
(16)  For every person on the premises who offers, or will offer, services for which a license under O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1, et seq. is required, a copy of the state license for each such person as well as a color photograph, no smaller than two inches by two inches, showing the face, neck, and shoulders of each such person; or, if there are none, a statement certifying that no person on the premises offers, or will offer, services for which said person is required to be licensed by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 43-24A-1, et seq. 
(17)  Executed consent forms authorizing the City to conduct background investigations, including criminal background investigations and fingerprint analysis and investigation, on the applicant and each individual listed in subsections (c)7 and (c)8. 
(18)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant, the operator(s), the owner(s), those individuals listed in subsections (c)(7) and (c)(8): 
a.  Authority. This subsection is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2), the Georgia Umbrella Statute entitled "dissemination of information to public agencies, political subdivisions, authorities, and instrumentalities." 
b.  Fingerprinting required. An individual seeking to receive a massage/spa establishment license or a massage/spa work permit shall be fingerprinted as a condition of submitting an application for said license or permit. By filing such application, the applicant consents to the city obtaining their criminal history record information (CHRI) from the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
c.  Access authorized; usage regulations. The city is hereby authorized to access national criminal history record information pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2). 
1.  Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all state laws and the Federal Privacy Act. 
2.  No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this section may be entered on any database. 
3.  No information given or obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
d.  Administration; fees; procedures. 
1.  Applicant shall provide his/her fingerprints, which may be taken by the city police department or may be taken by the county sheriff's office if the city police department is unable to do so. 
2.  The applicant shall bear the cost of: (1) fingerprinting if carried out by the county sheriff; (2) the charge by the GBI and the FBI for the CHRI history at their latest rate, paid to the city by certified or cashier's check or money order; and (3) an administrative fee allowed by statute to be charged by the city, which shall be the maximum allowed by statute, which is currently $20.00, which fee shall include fingerprinting when carried out by the city police department. 
3.  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the City will transmit said fingerprints and appropriate fees (unless a satisfactory billing arrangement has been entered into between the city police department and the GCIC and/or FBI) to the GCIC. As provided by law, the GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a comparison with nation-wide records, unless submission to the FBI is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the FBI check will be returned based on its current procedure, presently being directly to the city police department if submissions are made manually to the GCIC, or electronically from both the GBI and FBI where submissions are made electronically to the GCIC. 
4.  In compliance with federal law 95-544, which provides for the rendering of a "fitness determination," the city will decide whether the record applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth within this chapter. 
5.  A person who has consented to the city for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the city at no additional charge. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to state records and/or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(19)  Any additional information/paperwork deemed necessary by the city to properly evaluate the request for a license. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-405. - Consideration of application; issuance of license. 
Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment license application, the city police department shall conduct a background investigation based on the requirements of this article. Within 30 days of the filing of the completed application, the city police department shall either issue a recommendation for issuance or denial to the city manager. Upon review by the city manager, if the application meets the requirements of this article, the city manager shall, within 15 days of receipt of the police department's recommendation, approve or deny the license. Payment of the regulatory fee shall be due within ten days of approval and before issuance of the license. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-406. - Regulatory fee; expiration. 
(a)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee of $150.00 for each massage and spa establishment licensed within the city. The full regulatory fee shall be paid within ten days of approval of the application and shall not be prorated under any circumstances. 
(b)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and expire on December 31 of each year. Each subsequent application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. Existing licensees shall file applications by December 1 of each year for the following license year. Applications received after December 1 shall be subject to a ten percent late fee. 
(c)  No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-407. - Denial of license. 
The application for a massage/spa establishment license may be denied if there is any evidence of the following: 
(1)  The applicant(s) is less than 21 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant(s) has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The applicant(s) is neither the owner of the premises wherein the establishment will be operated, nor the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the license. 
(4)  The annual regulatory fee required by this article is not paid within ten days of approval. 
(5)  The City has revoked a massage/spa establishment license at the premises within the previous 12 months. 
(6)  The applicant(s) or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) or (c)8 of section 12-404 has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment suspended or revoked. 
(7)  The applicant(s) or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) or (c)8 of section 12-404 has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(8)  The establishment does not comply with all applicable building, health, and life safety code, or the building to be occupied does not have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(9)  The applicant(s) or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) or (c)8 of section 12-404 has in the previous 12 months resided with someone who has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, employee, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(10)  If at the time of application the applicant(s) or a person listed in response to subsection (c)(7) or (c)8 of section 12-404 is charged with a specified criminal activity, consideration of the application shall be dismissed without prejudice and the applicant shall be allowed to reapply upon final disposition of any such charge. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS OPERATION 

Sec. 12-408. - Employee work permits required. 
(a)  Massage/spa establishment work permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city without a valid massage/spa establishment work permit, except that a person who holds a valid massage/spa establishment license, and/or holds a license under the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq) shall not be required to obtain a massage/spa establishment work permit to be an "employee" at that particular licensed establishment. No person shall work at a massage establishment or a spa establishment in the city until he/she receives, and the establishment posts, the employee's work permit as required by this article. A receipt issued by the city is not a valid massage/spa establishment work permit and does not authorize the person to work in a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a massage/spa establishment work permit shall file in person at the city police department a completed application made on a form provided by the city. The application must be signed and notarized. Applicants shall make themselves available for photographing. An application shall be considered complete when it contains all of the information and/or items required in this subsection, accompanied by the work permit fee of $25.00: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five years. 
(2)  Current home address and mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by an agency of a state or of the federal government. 
(4)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's lawful presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1 along with a secure and verifiable document as defined by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2, and proof of lawful presence in the United States, if applicable. 
(5)  The name and address of the massage establishment or spa establishment for which the applicant seeks to obtain the work permit. 
(6)  A statement of whether the applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, employee, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has, (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(7)  A statement of whether the applicant has been cited for, arrested for, convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each such violation, arrest and/or conviction. 
(8)  Five years of work history. 
(9)  Five years of residential history. 
(10)  Executed consent form authorizing the city to conduct a background investigation, including a criminal background investigation, on the applicant 
(c)  Issuance of work permit. Upon the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the city police department shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the applicant. Within 15 days of the filing of a completed massage/spa establishment work permit application, the police chief or his designee shall either issue a work permit to the applicant or issue a written notice of denial of the work permit to the applicant. The police chief or his designee shall issue the work permit unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a work permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The work permit fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The establishment for which the applicant seeks a work permit does not have a valid massage/spa establishment license from the city. 
(5)  The applicant has been an owner, director, officer, partner, member, or shareholder of a massage establishment or spa establishment that has (at a time during which the person was so related to the establishment): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or. 
b.  Had its license to operate a massage establishment or a spa establishment revoked. 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to, a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(d)  The work permit, if issued, will be valid for a period of one year from the date it is issued. Replacement work permit(s) shall be issued upon purchase of a new card at the full amount and expire the same date as the then-current work permit. A massage establishment or spa establishment employee shall provide the employee's work permit to the establishment for which it was issued to be posted on the premises pursuant to this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose work permit has been revoked to refuse to return the work permit to the city police department or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the work permit. 
(f)  If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be dismissed without prejudice and the applicant shall be allowed to reapply upon final disposition of any such charge. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-409. - Revocation of license or work permit. 
(a)  Following a hearing, a license or permit issued under this article may be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation by the city manager for: 
(1)  A violation of this chapter and/or state or federal laws and regulations relating to massage or spa establishments; 
(2)  A material misrepresentation, false statement or omission in the application for the license or permit; or 
(3)  Ceasing to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)  When any person listed on a massage/spa establishment license application, any employee of the establishment, or any person who performs massage at the establishment, is arrested for unlawful sexual conduct of any kind alleged to have occurred at the massage establishment or spa establishment, no person listed on the establishment's license application and no employee of the establishment may apply for or be issued any new license or permit for that location. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-410. - Hearings. 
(a)  The city manager shall hear all matters relating to licenses and permits under this chapter, including, but not being limited to, suspensions, revocations, and any other matters affecting such licenses and permits. 
(b)  Licensees or permit holders shall be given written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose when the matter at issue will be heard. The applicant, licensee, or permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Ten calendar days' notice shall be required. 
(c)  Upon close of the hearing, a decision shall be rendered in writing by the city manager and issued no later than within 48 hours of the meeting absent the occurrence of circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the city manager. 
(d)  An applicant whose application has been denied, or a licensee or permit holder whose license or permit has been suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the city manager may appeal to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal within five business days of the adverse decision or action. Such notice shall be provided to the city clerk. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next governing authority meeting occurring at least ten days after the notice is received. The governing authority shall be provided a copy of all evidence heard by the city manager, along with a copy of the city manager's written decision. The applicant, licensee or permit holder may make a statement on their behalf before the governing authority, but no new evidence shall be taken. A vote on the appeal shall be taken either on the date of appeal hearing or at the next subsequent regular meeting of the governing authority. The decision of the governing authority shall be based on the evidence and standards of this chapter. If the governing authority determines the city manager acted in accordance with the standards of this chapter, it shall affirm his decision. If the governing authority determines the city manager acted contrary to the standards of this chapter, it shall overturn his decision and remand back to the city manager for a corrected decision. 
(e)  An applicant or licensee who is dissatisfied with the decision of the governing authority may appeal by filing for writ of certiorari with the superior court Paulding County, Georgia. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-411. - General operating provisions. 
(a)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a list of all persons who perform any service on the premises of the establishment, their home addresses and home or mobile telephone numbers, and a description of the duties and services performed for the massage or spa establishment. The holder of a massage/spa establishment license must also keep on file, on the premises of the establishment, a copy of the establishment's two most recent license applications. 
(b)  Massage establishments and spa establishments shall maintain correct and accurate records of each instance that a service is provided, including the date of the service, the type of service provided, the name of the person at the establishment who provided the service, and the patron's name. The records shall be subject to inspection by the city manager, the police chief, or their designees during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(c)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall allow any person required to have any state mandated licenses, or a massage/spa establishment work permit pursuant to this article, to perform any service on the premises until such person has procured such license or work permit. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage or spa establishment are required by this article to inspect and verify that each person who performs services on the premises who is required to have a valid state license or city work permit, has the required license or work permit on the establishment premises at all times, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. No person on the premises engaging in massage for which a state license is required shall refuse to provide a copy of the person's state massage therapy license upon request by any customer or city official. 
(d)  Each massage establishment and spa establishment shall have, at a minimum, a licensed massage therapist, on the premises at all hours that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If during an inspection there is no licensed massage therapist on the premise, the establishment must cease operations and close until a licensed massage therapist is on the premises. 
(e)  Records required to be maintained under this article shall be kept for a minimum of two years. Records shall be made available to the city manager, the police chief or their designee, during business hours, at the establishment's business location in the city. City officials shall use reasonable efforts under the circumstances to minimize business interruption when seeking records under this subparagraph and will otherwise comply with all applicable state or federal laws with respect to health-related protected information. 
(f)  All employees and other persons on the premises, with the exception of customers receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist, shall be completely clothed. For the purposes of this article, the term "completely clothed" means having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck, and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. No bras, bikini tops, bustiers, or like clothing may be exposed. All clothes worn in compliance with this article shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(g)  No employee may disrobe or in any way expose his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or the areola or nipple of the female breast on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(h)  No customer receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall expose his or her genitals, pubic area, anus, or the areola or nipple of the female breast to another person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. The prohibition against a customer exposing the areola or nipple of the female breast while receiving a massage from a state licensed massage therapist shall not apply when the massage therapist is certified to provide oncology massage or manual lymphatic drainage massage. 
(i)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall be or remain open for business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No person shall be or remain inside a massage establishment or spa establishment between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. No massage establishment or spa establishment shall hold itself out as open at a time that the establishment is prohibited under this subsection from being open for business. 
(j)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment. Signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code. 
(k)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code, as adopted by the city, and at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts (or equivalent illumination) shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(l)  Beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(m)  No massage establishment or spa establishment shall knowingly allow any minor (i.e., a person under the age of 18) to be or remain inside the massage establishment or spa establishment unless the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or a person who is at least 21 years of age and has been entrusted with the minor by the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(n)  No person shall knowingly touch, manipulate, fondle, or handle in any manner the sexual organs, genital area, or anus of any other person on the premises of a massage establishment or spa establishment. 
(o)  It shall be unlawful to operate a massage establishment or spa establishment with storefront windows that have material and glazing applied or affixed that reduces light transmission through the windows to less than 32 percent, plus or minus three percent, or increase light reflectance to more than 20 percent. 
(p)  Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall ensure that storefront windows are not blocked by curtains, blinds, or any other screening material during those times when the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(q)  Except in the event of an emergency, all patrons of massage and spa establishments shall be required to enter and exit the establishment via the establishment's front door. For purposes of this paragraph, the front door of the establishment shall be that door along the store-front portion of the establishment where signage announcing the business is placed and where the primary pedestrian or vehicular traffic occurs. 
(r)  No employee may assist any customer in showering, nor shall any employee make any physical contact with a customer while the customer is showering. 
(s)  It shall be prohibited for any massage or spa establishment to lock main entrance doors to the business or any door(s) to rooms where massage therapy is being performed. 
(t)  The list required by section 12-404(c)16 shall be updated immediately by the licensee as massage therapists are hired. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-412. - Posting licenses and rates. 
Massage establishments and spa establishments shall post each employee's work permit issued by the city and each massage therapist's state license in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the establishment so that it may be read at any time that the establishment is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
Price rates for all massage therapy and spa services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-413. - Escort services and adult entertainment prohibited. 
No massage therapy or spa establishment shall act as an escort or dating service or perform any adult entertainment. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-414. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage therapy or spa establishment or kept thereon. Alcoholic beverages mean and include all types and kinds of alcohol. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-415. - Inspection. 
Massage establishments, spa establishments, and their employees shall permit the city manager, police chief, and their designees or agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, any portion of the establishment premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the regulations of this article, during those times when the establishment is occupied by any patron or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 12-416. - Exemptions. 
The requirements of this division shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(a)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses. 
(b)  Cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to state law except that this exemption shall apply solely to massaging the head, neck, face, scalp and hair of the patron. 
(c)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals. 
(d)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(e)  State licensed massage therapists that are employees, sub-contractors or otherwise affiliated with a State Licensed medical doctor or osteopath, chiropractor, physical or occupational therapist, podiatrist, acupuncturist, registered or licensed practical nurse. 
(Ord. 2018-08, § 1 (Exh. A), 10-2-2018) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Police services public safety; 
(3)  Medical and health services; 
(4)  Rescue; 
(5)  Engineering; 
(6)  Warning services; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas; 
(9)  Emergency welfare services; 
(10)  Emergency transportation; 
(11)  Nuclear power plant protection; 
(12)  Temporary restoration of public service utility services; and 
(13)  Other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the Governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § I) 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 14-2. - Local organization for emergency management. 
It is the desire and intent of the governing officials of the city that the city be a party of the county emergency management agency. The chairperson of the county commissioners, with the concurrence of the mayor, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the chairperson or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such chairperson or governing body. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the city for approval, and thence to the state emergency management for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g. financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § II) 
Sec. 14-3. - County emergency management agency. 
(a)  The county emergency agency shall be established around existing city and county departments. The emergency support functions, (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows, department/agency assignment listed below are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities: 

 
(As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan.) 
(b)  Heads of county departments listed in subsection (a) of this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § III) 
Sec. 14-4. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor, separately, or jointly with the chairperson of the county commission, or in their absence, their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter, shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the Governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § IV) 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 14-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the City of Hiram, Georgia, performing emergency functions pursuant to this ordinance, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § V) 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-35. 
Sec. 14-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as an offense. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § VI) 
Sec. 14-7. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2011, § VII) 
Sec. 14-8. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy; imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city; or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of any such inhabitant. 
(3)  Wear, carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal home rule power to exercise authority regarding stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

Sec. 16-60. - Description. 
This article provides a framework for the city to develop buffer zones for streams, as well as the requirements that minimize land development within those buffers. It is the purpose of these buffer zone requirements to protect and stabilize stream banks, protect water quality and preserve aquatic and riparian habitat. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, intro., 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Hiram Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 1, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-62. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Whereas, the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(b)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 2, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-63. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 16-65(a)(1)), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 16-65(a)(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city manager or his designee may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 3, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-64. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 16-63. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
b.  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
e.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
f.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(2)a of this section. 
c.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city clerk or his designee on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city clerk or his designee to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
d.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  This article shall apply to all new subdividing and platting activities. 
(c)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 16-65(b). 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 4, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-65. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the buffer and setback requirements in subsection (a) of this section may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this article, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city manager or his designee finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the county zoning board of variances and appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the county zoning board of variances and appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote by the county zoning board of variances and appeals. The city manager or his designee shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city manager or his designee shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 5, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-66. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 6, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-67. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city manager or his designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 7, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-68. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 8, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-69. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city manager or his designee in making such inspections. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 9, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-70. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the following penalties shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city manager or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or his designee may bring the matter to the municipal court, which may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or the city police department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 10, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-71. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of city manager or his designee may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the governing authority shall be entitled to a hearing before the governing authority within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the governing authority after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal by certiorari to superior court. 
(Ord. No. 06-94A, § 11, 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 16-72—16-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 16-101. - Description. 
Litter found throughout the city often finds its way into our streams, rivers and lakes and detracts from our quality of life. Pollutants carried into our streams, rivers, and lakes by litter diminish the quality of our water and its aquatic resources. Litter control ordinances provide a prohibition against littering and provide an enforcement mechanism with penalties for dealing with those found littering. This article is modeled on the "Georgia Litter Control Law" (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.) and adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, intro., 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-102. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are as follows: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the incorporated limits city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, § 1, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-103. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "hazardous waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties as well as construction sites. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, § 2, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2015-01, §§ 1, 2, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 16-104. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons (including construction site operators) to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; and 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, § 3, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 3, 5-5-2015) 
Sec. 16-105. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, § 4, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-106. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon the issuance of a citation by the city manager or his designee or city police department and upon conviction by the municipal court thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the municipal court; 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof including, but not limited to, the city, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, but not limited to, the city are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-94B, § 5, 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 16-107—16-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 16-126. - Description. 
An illicit discharge is defined as any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system (stormwater drainage system) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff (except for discharges allowed under an NPDES permit or nonpolluting flows). These non-stormwater discharges occur due to illegal dumping or illegal connections to the stormwater drainage system. This article provides the city with the authority to deal with illicit discharges and establishes enforcement actions for those persons or entities found to be in noncompliance or that refuse to allow access to their facilities. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, intro., 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-127. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(7)  Therefore, the city adopts this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, intro., 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-128. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 1, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-129. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or though prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. The term "construction activity" includes construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 16-130. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. The term "pollutants" may include, but is not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 2, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-130. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision herein: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city manager or his designee as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city manager or his designee requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 3, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-131. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager or his designee prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 4, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-132. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city manager or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the city manager or his designee, representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city manager or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city manager or his designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city manager or his designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city manager or his designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city manager or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager or his designee access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city manager or his designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city manager or his designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city manager or his designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 5, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-133. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the city manager or his designee in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager or his designee within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 6, 9-5-2006) 
Sec. 16-134. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city manager or his designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city manager or his designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city manager or his designee may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require, without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager or his designee. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the governing authority shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the governing authority shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the governing authority upholding the decision of the city manager or his designee, then the city manager or his designee or other representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest to the city manager or his designee, objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. If the property owner objects to the decision by the city manager or his designee concerning said written protest within 30 days from such decision by the city manager or his designee, the property owner may file a written appeal to the governing authority. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision by the governing authority on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate, after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city manager or his designee may bring the matter to the municipal court, which may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or his designee or the police department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city manager or his designee may seek cumulative remedies. The city manager or his designee may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 06-94C, § 7, 9-5-2006) 
Secs. 16-135—16-151. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 16-152. - Description. 
This article addresses post-development stormwater management requirements for new development and redevelopment in the city. The article defines requirements for a post-development stormwater management plan, which is required in order to undertake land development activities. This plan contains the details of how the development will address post-development stormwater runoff quality and quantity impacts resulting from the permanent alteration of the character and hydrology of the land surface as well as the nonpoint source pollution from land use activities. The article also outlines the water quantity and quality performance criteria for managing this runoff and specifies local requirements for the use of structural stormwater controls and nonstructural practices, in order to protect public health and safety, protection of public and private property and infrastructure, and environmental protection. Ongoing long-term inspection and maintenance provisions are provided. The majority of technical criteria and standards are adopted by reference through the use of the state stormwater management manual. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, intro.) 
Sec. 16-153. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or credits. The state greenspace program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution; 
(6)  Therefore, the city has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, intro.) 
Sec. 16-154. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city manager or his designee to be a hotspot land use; or 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (b)(1)a and b of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Designation of administrator. The city manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Stormwater design manual. The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the state stormwater management manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 16-155. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. The term "impervious surfaces" includes, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city manager or his designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Predevelopment refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 16-156. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city manager or his designee a permit application on a form provided by the city manager or his designee for that purpose. 
(3)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
a.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
b.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
c.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; 
d.  Performance bond in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, if applicable; and, 
e.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer shall meet with the city manager or his designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which should [shall] be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater Management System Concept Plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, the Paulding County greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 16-157. 
(2)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
a.  Address and legal description. The common address and legal description of the site. 
b.  Map. A vicinity map. 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
1.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
2.  The acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
3.  All perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; 
4.  All existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; 
5.  The direction of flow and exits from the site; 
6.  An analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
7.  The methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: 
1.  A topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; 
2.  The total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
3.  The calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-157; 
4.  The location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
5.  The documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; 
6.  The methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 16-157 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: 
1.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
2.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
3.  The cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
4.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
5.  The documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 16-157; 
6.  The drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and 
7.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
1.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
2.  The information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
3.  The descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
4.  The density of plantings; 
5.  The descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
6.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city manager or his designee as provided in subsection (c)(4) of this section, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section (c)(4) of this section. 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city manager or his designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(4)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city manager or his designee, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
b.  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city manager or his designee and reviewed and approved by the city attorney prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
c.  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
d.  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
e.  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 16-159. 
f.  In lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, the governing authority, by affirmative vote, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(5)  Performance and maintenance bonds. (Reserved). 
(6)  Application procedure. 
a.  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city manager or his designee. 
b.  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) of this section (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
c.  The city manager or his designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
d.  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection and subsection (c)(6)c of this section shall apply to such resubmittal. 
e.  Upon a finding by the city manager or his designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city manager or his designee may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met, including, but not limited to, the posting of securities by the applicant in an amount and for a time period to be determined by the city manager or his designee. 
f.  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
2.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
3.  The city manager or his designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
4.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city manager or his designee; and 
5.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 16-158(b). 
(7)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the governing authority and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(8)  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
a.  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
b.  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city manager or his designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
c.  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
1.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
2.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
3.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
4.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
5.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 16-157. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the state stormwater management manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the state stormwater management manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city manager or his designee are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the state stormwater management manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the state stormwater management manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city manager or his designee before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city manager or his designee may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the state stormwater management manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city manager or his designee, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the state stormwater management manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 16-158. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee or conducted and certified by a professional engineer licensed by the state who has been approved by the governing authority. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer licensed by the state. A final inspection by the city manager or his designee is required before the release of any securities can occur. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 16-159. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city manager or his designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the city manager or his designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city manager or his designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or his designee, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city manager or his designee may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 16-160. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described as follows shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the governing authority by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or his designee may bring the matter to the municipal court, which may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
b.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or his designee or the police department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2006, § 7) 
Secs. 16-161—16-180. - Reserved 
ARTICLE VI. - CAR WASH RECYCLING 

Sec. 16-181. - Title; applicability. 
This article shall be known as the City of Hiram "Car Wash Recycling" ordinance. This article applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after August 5, 2014, regardless of the water source. The provisions of this article do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before August 5, 2014, or to any self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 18-182. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have the meaning defined in this section whenever used in this article: 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car whereupon the vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash, and the driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2014) 
Sec. 18-183. - Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after August 5, 2014 must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized must be recycled. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-5-2014) 
Chapter 18 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 2014, repealed Ch. 18 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 18 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-9, pertained to floods and derived from Ord. No. 06-94D, intro., §§ 1—7, adopted Sept. 5, 2006. 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(c)  Designation of chapter administrator. The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future conditions flood elevations," "future conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Paulding County may be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto available from www.msc.fema.gov. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Hiram, Georgia; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Hiram, Georgia, and 
b.  Any future conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Hiram City Hall. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Hiram or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 1), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Adjacent means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc., with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager or his/her designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future conditions hydrology (100-year future conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as structure. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before February 5, 1990. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 5, 1990. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future conditions flood. 
Future conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future conditions flood. 
Future conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future conditions flood. 
Future conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced on or after February 5, 1990 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 5, 1990. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Hiram or its designated representatives to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 2), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-3. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Hiram, Georgia, a permit application on a form provided by the City of Hiram for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 18-5(2)b.; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 18-5(1)e.; and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to, permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city manager or his/her designee a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager or his/her designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the city manager or his/her designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city manager or his/her designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 18-4 and 18-5; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the city manager or his/her designee shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager or his/her designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager or his/her designee and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the mayor and city council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 3), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-4. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Hiram, Georgia. If future conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Hiram, Georgia, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Hiram, Georgia. If floodway data is not available from the City of Hiram, Georgia, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection 18-4(c)(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future condition flood elevation for the future conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection 18-4(d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Hiram using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia, prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Hiram, Georgia, until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The City of Hiram, Georgia, may direct the property owner (at no cost to City of Hiram, Georgia) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 4), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-5. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  General standards. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) have been met; 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
c.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
d.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
e.  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
2.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
3.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
f.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
g.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
h.  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of City of Hiram, Georgia, to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
i.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
j.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
k.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
l.  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
m.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
n.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
o.  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
p.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
1.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(2)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future conditions floodplain. 
a.  Residential buildings. 
1.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. 
2.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. 
b.  Non-residential buildings. 
1.  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his/her designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
2.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the city manager or his/her designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his/her designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
c.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 18-5(1)e.1. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
d.  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 18-5(2)a.), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
e.  Standards for manufactured homes. 
1.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 18-4(c), (d), and (e) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. 
2.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)g. 
(3)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future conditions floodplain. 
a.  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. 
b.  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(4)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the city manager or his/her designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 18-5(1)e.1. 
(5)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 18-5(1)e.1.; 
b.  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the (ordinance administrator) using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
c.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(6)  Standards for subdivisions of land. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future conditions flood elevation data; 
b.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
c.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 18-3(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 5), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-6. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the City of Hiram, Georgia. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the City of Hiram. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, as established in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the mayor and council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and city council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The city manager or his/her designee shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the mayor and city council shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the mayor and city council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 6), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 18-7. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the City of Hiram, Georgia, determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Hiram, Georgia, by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Hiram may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The City of Hiram may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Hiram, Georgia, may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Hiram, Georgia, may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Hiram, Georgia, may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Hiram, Georgia, has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Hiram, Georgia, may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the City of Hiram, Georgia, may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A, § 7), 8-5-2014; Ord. No. 2018-09, § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2018) 
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— A copy of the police department's standing operating procedures dated January 14, 1993, is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3. 

Chapter 22 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STRUCTURAL NUISANCES 

Sec. 22-21. - Findings. 
The governing authority find that within the city: 
(1)  There is an existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the jurisdiction where property is located within the city limits of the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state, including, but not limited to the residents of the city; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures; 
(2)  It is found and declared that within the city there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation; 
(3)  It is found that there exists within the city, dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, power is conferred upon the city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner hereinafter provided in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 27-0; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in chapter 2 of title 8 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.) as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in chapter 2 of title 25 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.) after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(1)  The term "dwellings," "buildings," or "structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
(2)  The term "dwellings," "buildings," or "structures" does not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest and/or interested parties mean persons: 
(1)  In possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Having paid an occupational tax to the city for a location or office at the subject building or structure; 
(4)  Having filed a property tax return with the county as to the subject property, building, or structure; 
(5)  Owner; or 
(6)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the superior court of the county. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Public authority means any member of governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Code 1996, § 27-1; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-23. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the governing authority that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(Code 1996, § 27-2; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-24. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer: procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthy. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The governing authority appoints or designates the police chief or his designee as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. The governing authority reserves the right to change the appointment or designation of the public officer and/or to designate, and/or appoint others as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(d)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. 
(e)  The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(f)  The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less that 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(g)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination that a nuisance exists and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into lull compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification, as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(h)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(i)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(j)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner or the city revenue officer, who is responsible to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection of real property ad valorem tax, including specifically chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority. 
(2)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(3)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this ordinance together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(4)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(5)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court of the county under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(6)  The public officer/officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(7)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(8)  The failure to abate or remove such nuisance as required by this article shall allow the judge of the municipal court to enforce such failure as an offense and/or as a violation of the city ordinances and issue such fines or other enforcement as allowed by the city Charter for the enforcement of violations of city ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1996, § 27-3; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-25. - Determination by public officer under existing ordinances that dwellings, buildings or structures are vacant: conditions of nuisances 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of: 
(1)  The occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; 
(2)  The occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or 
(3)  Other residents of the city. 
(b)  Such conditions include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(c)  The public officer may determine under existing ordinances, that a dwelling or building is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence that drug crimes are being committed. 
(Code 1996, § 27-4; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-26. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees, as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 1996, § 27-5; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-27. - Service of complaints. 
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the manner set forth in this section. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following manner: 
(1)  a.  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. 
b.  Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Code 1996, § 27-5; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-28. - Appeal. 
Any persons or other entity found to be in violation of this article by order of the judge of the municipal court shall have the right to appeal of any such order within 30 days of entry, in writing to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 27-7; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Secs. 22-29—22-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 22-85. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city, and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 50 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. 
Sec. 22-86. - Specific acts or conditions deemed loud, disturbing. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary sounds or noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of this signaling device and the sounding of this device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of this signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up is prohibited. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is reasonably necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which this machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of the set, instrument, phonograph machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the room, building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure is prohibited. Announcements over loudspeakers shall only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity, is prohibited. 
(5)  Noisy animals or birds. Keeping or maintaining an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long-continued sound or noise. This subsection shall not apply to horses, livestock, poultry or other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with the city zoning ordinances. 
(6)  Construction or repair of buildings. The creation of any noise in violation of this chapter due to the erection, excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building requiring the issuance of a building permit, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, is hereby prohibited; except as allowed by the city by permit specifically permitting overnight construction. 
(7)  Transportation of metal rails, similar materials. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any manner so loaded as to cause unreasonably loud noises or as to unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of those streets or other public places is prohibited. 
(8)  Pile drivers, hammers, similar equipment. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by unreasonably loud or unusual sounds or noises, is prohibited. 
(9)  Blowers and motors. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noises due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids is prohibited; unless the noise from this blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler device reasonably sufficient to deaden the noise. 
(10)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited; except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or a warning of fire or danger upon request of proper authorities. 
(11)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, or motor boat is prohibited; except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(12)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create unreasonably loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises is prohibited. 
(13)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of unreasonably loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers is prohibited. 
(14)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any unreasonably excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of the institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospitals is prohibited; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that it is a school, hospital or court street. 
(15)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood is prohibited. 
Sec. 22-87. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the county, city or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform this work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses and/or permitted public gatherings. 
(4)  Outdoor entertainment provided at restaurants with outdoor dining areas on private property which are located as shown on the official zoning map/downtown development district provided the outdoor entertainment occurs within the outdoor dining area between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays, and 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. on Sundays, and the sound from same does not exceed a sound level plainly audible at a distance more than 100 feet from the point of origin of said sound. 
Secs. 22-88—22-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARE OF PREMISES 

Sec. 22-118. - Findings. 
There is an existence of junk cars, junk motor vehicles and other conditions of property within the city, which are creating a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. There exist a public necessity for removing, repairing, or disposing by demolition or otherwise of such junk cars, junk motor vehicles and other conditions detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1996, § 28-0; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-119. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a carport, attached or detached garage, storage building or any other not-for-habitation buildings on the premises (as generally defined by statutory and judicial principles in Georgia). 
Derelict automotive vehicle means a vehicle that for a period of at least ten consecutive days: 
(1)  Is physically incapable of traveling under its own power; 
(2)  Is physically capable of traveling under its own power, but during such traveling on a public road would be in violation of any provision of Title 40, Chapter 8, Article I, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; or 
(3)  Possesses at least one of the following characteristics: 
a.  At least one broken window. 
b.  At least one door that cannot be opened. 
c.  At least one door that cannot be closed. 
d.  Parts of the vehicle are attached to the vehicle with tape or wire. 
e.  Excessive rusting covering at least 30 percent of the body of the vehicle. 
f.  Missing a door, the hood, the trunk cover, or a tire. 
Derelict boat or trailer-type vehicle means a boat or trailer-type vehicle which: 
(1)  Is dismantled, partially dismantled, deteriorated or not safe for use due to disrepair or damage; and 
(2)  Which constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents, and other animals to exist, attracts children, vagrants, or other individuals and may cause injury to them. 
Established driveway means an area that is paved, graveled, bare of vegetation, or otherwise clearly indicative of the area that is normally used for vehicles to enter onto or exit from real property from or to a public or private street. 
Front yard means that portion of the property running the width of the principal building on the lot as extended to the right-of-way line of an abutting street. If there is no building on the property, the entire property shall be deemed the "front yard." 
Object means any items of personal property, other than a vehicle, boat or trailer-type vehicle, which is not related to the use and purpose for which the real property is occupied or owned or permitted by the applicable zoning classification. The term "objects" under this article shall also include junk materials (any item that has no significant value in its present form); machinery and equipment; appliances or other household items; lumber and building materials; dirt, sand, fill, rock, stone, or other materials not forming part of a structure or landscaping. This definition shall also apply to abandoned tires, dilapidated buildings, and other unsightly accumulations of debris that may be placed on residential, commercial, or industrial property. 
Person means any natural person, corporation, partnership, authority created by statute, association or other entity or combination thereof. 
To place means to establish the presence on property of an object which: 
(1)  Is capable of being moved or removed which is not affixed to the real property; and 
(2)  Is present for a period of ten consecutive days whether or not the location of the item on the property is changed. 
Vehicle, automotive, means an automobile, truck, van, or other motor vehicle designed and intended for use in transporting people and goods. 
(Code 1996, § 28-1; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-120. - Occupants or owners to keep premises free of litter, debris, junk materials, derelict vehicles and overgrowth. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of premises or the owner of premises to have or to place any of the following on said premises to the extent and in a manner that could threaten or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or could adversely affect and impair the economic value of adjacent property: 
(1)  Any accumulation of litter, debris, refuse, garbage or animal excrement on any front, side, or rear yard or on any porch, or underneath any building or in any accessory building. 
(2)  Any object or objects as defined, on the front yard or on a front porch of residential, commercial, or industrial property. 
(3)  Any object or objects, as defined, on the side or rear yards, or on side or rear porches or underneath any building or in any accessory building unless such objects are completely enclosed within a building or are enclosed with a solid fence of such height that the objects are completely screened from the view of persons on adjacent property and to passers-by on public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Any overgrown grass or weeds of a height of six inches or more or any other unkempt vegetation, including but not limited to dead tree limbs or dead trees, in any yard, front, side or rear. 
(5)  Any storage building on the front yard or any dilapidated storage building on the side or rear yard. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle, derelict boat or derelict trailer-type vehicle or parts thereof on an established driveway of a front yard, and it shall be unlawful to place, keep, store or allow to remain any derelict automotive vehicle, derelict boat or derelict trailer-type vehicle or parts thereof on the side or rear yards if visible from a street, lane, or adjoining property unless completely enclosed within an accessory building so as not to be visible from the street, lane, or adjoining property. In the case of a dispute as to the condition of a vehicle, the owner will cooperate with the police chief or his designee to verify the state of repair of the vehicle within five days of notice. If the vehicle owner does not cooperate with the police chief or his designee, the vehicle shall be presumed to be in violation of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to material which is being used in connection with a construction actively taking place on said premises provided the construction activity is being diligently pursued and complies with applicable ordinances and codes. 
(d)  No person shall store, keep, maintain, or allow to be kept for sale on any property which is, zoned for commercial or industrial uses within the city any used, wrecked, dismantled or junk automobiles or vehicles, or any new or used appliances, antiques, furniture, lumber, machinery, equipment, building material, cordage, and similar items and material unless the same is housed in a building. However, property displayed for sale during normal business hours may be stored outside for a period not to exceed 12 hours each business day. Seasonal sales products may be displayed outside during the appropriate season, but in no case shall remain stored outside no longer than 30 days. Any person needing a period of time in excess of 30 days for the outside display of seasonal sales products shall make a written application to the governing authority for such approval. 
(Code 1996, § 28-2; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-121. - Exemptions. 
Derelict automotive vehicles and derelict boat or derelict trailer type vehicles which are exempted from the provisions of this article are those which are: 
(1)  Located on the premises of any licensed dealer of any motor vehicle; 
(2)  Located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of any such junkyards; 
(3)  Enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health, safety or welfare; 
(4)  In operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; 
(5)  In the process of being restored to an operable condition provided they are: 
a.  Limited to no more than one in number; 
b.  Located in the rear yard and behind the house of the owner of such vehicles; 
c.  Not visible from any public street, alley, way, road, or adjoining property; 
d.  Must maintain a current county and/or state tag decal; and 
e.  Are enclosed or covered in such a way so as not to be an attractive nuisance to children. 
(Code 1996, § 28-3; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-122. - Maintenance of commercial and industrial properties. 
All owners and occupants of commercial and industrial properties within the city shall keep buildings and other structures on such property in a good state of repair and free from dilapidation. The following constitute an illustrative, but not exclusive, listing of dilapidated conditions, which constitute a violation of this Code: 
(1)  Broken windows or broken glass in doors; 
(2)  Gutters which are bent, missing, or which have pulled loose from their secured installation; 
(3)  Awnings which are torn, bent, or which present a dilapidated appearance due to holes, missing edging, or discoloration; 
(4)  Roofing material, which is missing, broken or which has blown loose; 
(5)  Peeling or blistered paint; 
(6)  Mildewed exterior surfaces; 
(7)  Repairs utilizing mismatched or substandard materials; 
(8)  Wood which is splintered, rotting, or which has lost its structural integrity; 
(9)  Masonry which has missing pieces or severe cracking; 
(10)  Raw untreated wood exposed to the elements; 
(11)  Any condition which would constitute a violation of the Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
Sec. 22-123. - Closure of businesses. 
(a)  For all structures designed to be used for or occupied by commercial or industrial uses, but which are currently vacant or are scheduled to become vacant, the owner of the property shall secure such structures for the protection of the property against vandalism and for the aesthetic preservation of the neighborhood and shall maintain such security measures until the building is once again occupied. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the building owner shall remove all signage which no longer refers to a commercial or industrial use of the property, shall cover all windows of the structure with plywood which shall be painted in a color complementary to the building, and shall likewise secure all glass doors with a painted plywood covering. 
(c)  The owner of the vacant commercial or industrial property shall be responsible for maintaining the exterior of the building in accordance with all city codes and ordinances, including this Property Maintenance Code, and shall further be responsible for cleaning the exterior of premises to keep the exterior free from litter and other debris. The owner of such property shall promptly remove any litter and debris left upon the exterior of the property. 
(d)  While an owner may require any of the actions required by this section to be performed by a tenant prior to vacating the premises, such delegation will not relieve the owner from full compliance with this section or negate the owner's liability to the city in any manner whatsoever. 
Sec. 22-124. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the governing authority and/or the chief of police or his designee that any nuisance exists as stated in this article within the incorporated area of the city, a notice or citation in writing shall be served by the police department upon the owner and occupant of the real property within the city where the violation exists, and/or upon the owner of the derelict motor vehicle which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing them to remove such within 30 days of this notice. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigation, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the offending condition is located, and upon the object or derelict motor vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 28-4; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-125. - Responsibility for compliance. 
Upon receipt of the notice as provided in section 22-124, it shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the property to remove the object, derelict motor vehicle or other violating condition, bringing the property into compliance with this Code. In the event the owner and/or occupant of the property fails to take such action to eliminate the violating condition within the timeframe set out in the notice, then such person shall be cited to appear before the municipal court to answer to the charge of maintaining a nuisance. At least five days' notice of the court appearance shall be given prior to hearing of any nuisance charge. 
(Code 1996, § 28-5; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-126. - Hearing. 
(a)  At the hearing, the judge of municipal court shall determine the owner and/or the person who is in control or possession of the property covered by the notice and whether or not a nuisance as defined by this article exists. If so, the judge of the municipal court shall order an abatement or removal of such nuisance and/or shall impose such penalty or penalties for an offense as may be authorized by this article or any other applicable ordinance for failure to abate or remove such nuisance. 
(b)  In the event that the judge of the municipal court determines by written findings of fact, that a nuisance exists and abatement or removal the thereof is ordered, the judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to grant the owner and/or person who is in control or possession of the premises a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate or remove such nuisance. The judge of the municipal court shall further include in such order provisions authorizing the police department to abate or remove such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated or removed by the owner or person in control or possession of the premises within the time period for such abatement or removal as ordered. Such order shall also include authority for the police department or any authorized city contractor to enter upon the premises or real property upon which the nuisance exists and to abate or remove the same, and shall further provide that the cost incurred by the police department of abatement or removal of the nuisance incurred by the city shall be assessed against the owner or person in control or possession of the premises or real property. 
(Code 1996, § 28-6; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-127. - Abatement by the city. 
In the event that the nuisance is abated or removed by the police department pursuant to order of the judge of the municipal court as authorized herein, the police department shall be authorized to abate or remove the nuisance in the following manner: 
(1)  The police department may acquire a wrecker service, or such other service or assistance or personnel as may be required to remove or abate the nuisance, which shall include, but be limited to, the ability to direct that the nuisance be removed or abated by removal to a local licensed junkyard or other similar storage facility. 
(2)  The police department shall notify the owner of the premises or real property upon which the nuisance exists, and/or the person in control or possession or the owner of said object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer within ten days of any such removal, the location of the object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer and of the cost incurred by the police department in connection with the abatement or removal. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer and any storage charges, if applicable. 
(3)  In the event that the owner of the premises or real property upon which a nuisance exists and/or the person in control or possession or the owner of such object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer does not pay all of the costs incurred and/or storage charges as stated in subsection (2) of this section in order to recover or obtain the object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer within 30 days from any such removal as allowed by this article, the governing authority shall be authorized to dispose of such object, derelict motor vehicle or derelict boat or boat trailer in any manner as may be authorized and allowed by the laws of the state and/or the ordinances in order to recover the costs incurred and/or storage charges as allowed by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 28-7; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-128. - Failure to abate. 
The failure to abate or remove such nuisance as required by this article shall allow the judge of the municipal court to enforce such failure as an offense and/or as a violation of the ordinances and issue such fines or other enforcement as allowed by the city Charter for the enforcement of violations of city ordinances and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1996, § 28-8; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Sec. 22-129. - Appeal. 
Any persons or other entity found to be in violation of this article by order of the judge of the municipal court shall have the right to appeal any such order within 30 days of entry, by certiorari, to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1996, § 28-9; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; abandoned motor vehicles generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Camping in public. 
No person shall camp in the streets, sidewalks or public parks of the city without permission from the governing authority. 
Sec. 24-2. - Building fires in public places. 
No person shall build a fire in the streets, sidewalks or city park other than in established barbeque devices without permission from the fire official. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 5; Code 1996, § 46-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Fastening bills to poles and trees. 
No person shall paste or in any manner fasten any bills, advertisements or any other notices to any telephone, electric or telegraph pole or any shade tree in the city. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 9; Code 1996, § 46-3) 
Sec. 24-4. - Firearms and BB guns. 
No person shall fire a gun, pistol or other firearm, or fire or discharge any airgun, commonly known as a BB gun, in the city. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 10; Code 1996, § 46-4) 
Sec. 24-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so; 
(6)  Use any type of profane or lewd language in a public place that is offensive to another, causes another to become outraged and thus creates a turmoil; or 
(7)  Urinate, defecate, or release bodily fluids in any public area. As used in this subsection, the term "public area" means sidewalks, parking lots, streets, parks, trails or any area in which the public would reasonably be expected to frequent or visit. 
State Law reference— Authority to punish disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 24-6. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street or highway or within the curtilage of any private residence not in exclusive possession of the person so intoxicated, or upon any railway passenger train or other public conveyance, or at or on ballgrounds, parks and swimming pools, or at any other place or public gathering or assembly, where such drunkenness is caused by the excessive use of intoxicating beverages or opiates. Such drunkenness must be made manifest by boisterousness or by indecent condition or behavior or by vulgar, profane, or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person so intoxicated. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 24; Code 1996, § 46-8) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 24-7. - Resisting an officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose or resist any police officer of this city in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 25; Code 1996, § 46-9) 
State Law reference— Hindering apprehension of criminals, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-50; fleeing or attempting to elude police officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395. 
Sec. 24-8. - Theft or injury of city property. 
No person shall take, mar, deface, soil or in any manner injure, disturb or interfere with any city property. 
(Code 1965, ch. 10, § 29; Code 1996, § 46-13) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 24-9. - Public nudity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person over four years of age within the incorporated area of the city to knowingly or intentionally appear in a state of nudity in any public place including, but not limited to, establishments that accommodate the public. The term "nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1996, § 46-16; Ord. No. 91-40, 9-3-1991) 
Sec. 24-10. - Hours of operation for city parks. 
(a)  The hours of operation for all city parks are from 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Only authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the city manager, or the designee thereof, are permitted in any city park outside of hours of operation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a properly authorized city employee, to be in or on any city park property beyond the established hours of operation without permission from the city manager, or the designee thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disregard an order from a city police officer or code enforcement officer to leave city park property. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 4-3-2018) 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., the city is included in the county's comprehensive solid waste management plan adopted February 7, 1994. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Unauthorized accumulations. 
No person shall keep or store garbage, trash or solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in article II of this chapter or under the express prior approval of the city manager or his designee. No garbage, trash or solid waste improperly contained will be collected by the city garbage collection service. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is further hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The city manager or his designee, by written notice, shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such garbage, trash or solid waste accumulations to remove such accumulations. Failure to remove such accumulations within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject to penalties set forth in the general penalties described in section 1-12. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(Code 1996, § 50-1; Ord. of 3-3-1980) 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Garbage collection and disposal is carried out in the city by contract. A copy of such contract is on file in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 26-21. - Containers; specifications; replacement. 
Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust resistant, rodentproof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 55 gallons. Containers failing to comply with this section, or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection, or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(Code 1996, § 50-31; Ord. of 3-3-1980) 
Sec. 26-22. - Collection; monthly charge. 
Garbage, trash and solid waste shall be collected from residential premises weekly at a monthly charge as may be set from time to time by resolution of the governing authority and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1996, § 50-32; Ord. of 3-3-1980) 
Chapter 26A - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 

Sec. 26A-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection of the public health, welfare, and safety by prescribing the conditions and requirements for solid waste collection, transportation, disposal, and management and penalties for noncompliance; to protect and preserve the environment through these conditions and requirements and establishment of a recycling program for various residential solid waste; and to accomplish these goals as efficiently and economically as possible. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Hiram, Georgia "Solid Waste Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-3. - Scope of ordinance. 
This chapter applies only to the collection and disposal of residential refuse. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-4. - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of certain terms used in this chapter is as follows: 
City means the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by any commercial establishment including, but not limited to, stores, offices, warehouses, restaurants, and other manufacturing and nonmanufacturing activities. 
Construction/remodeling/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations to structures or property, including, but not limited to, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wall board, and other similar types of non-putrescible wastes generated by such activities. 
Franchise means the authorization bestowed by the governing authority pursuant to this chapter to be the person provider the solid waste collection, transportation, and disposal services described in this chapter. 
Franchisee means that person selected by the governing authority and authorized by resolution to provide the solid waste collection and disposal services provided for by this chapter. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludge; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, asbestos and asbestos containing waste, lead and lead containing waste, radioactive materials, and all other materials classified as hazardous by state and federal law. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Putrescible waste means waste that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, and household garbage. 
Refuse means and includes the terms garbage, solid waste, recyclable materials, refuse, rubble, rubbish, trash, and other similar forms of putrescible and non-putrescible waste. 
Residential refuse means solid waste derived from single-family households including refuse, garbage, trash, ashes, paper and paper products, agricultural product, and other similar types of putrescible waste. The term does not include yard waste and trimmings, white goods such as appliances and furniture, any construction/remodeling/demolition waste, or any commercial solid waste. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words in the singular also include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory not merely directory. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-5. - Establishment of exclusive franchise for collection and disposal of residential solid waste. 
(a)  Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, no person other than a franchisee duly authorized by the governing authority shall collect, transport, or dispose of residential refuse in the city. 
(b)  Commencing after the first award by resolution of a franchise contract to a franchisee by the governing authority, requests for proposal shall be issued every three years soliciting proposals for the collection, transportation, and disposal of residential refuse. The city shall not be required to accept any proposal so submitted but may reject all proposals and rebid the award of the franchise contract as determined by the governing authority to be in the best interests of the city and the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(c)  The request for proposals shall prescribe the terms, conditions, and requirements for due consideration of a proposal as well as the terms, conditions, and requirements for any franchise contract authorized to the extent not contrary to the language of this chapter or any other provision of law. Those responding to requests for proposal must also comply with all other requirements of law governing the provision of services to the city as they may be established or exist from time to time. 
(d)  By resolution the governing authority shall select a person to provide all residential refuse collection, transportation, and disposal. Such a selection shall be exclusive, meaning that the person provided shall be the sole provider of residential refuse collection, transportation, and disposal throughout the city. 
(e)  No award of a franchise or any services to be provided thereof as provided for in this chapter may be delegated, assigned, or otherwise transferred to any other person without the express permission of the governing authority, to be evidenced only by a duly authorized resolution to that effect. 
(f)  Any person wanting to be considered for award of the exclusive franchise must meet the following minimum requirements and provide proper proof thereof: 
(1)  Application shall be made as prescribed in a request for proposal. Proposals failing to provide the information prescribed in the request for proposal shall not be accepted or considered; 
(2)  A notarized statement certifying that all solid waste collection, transportation, and disposal equipment meets the minimum requirements of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and any State of Georgia counterpart and, as applicable, the minimum requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT); 
(3)  A notarized statement certifying that all heavy equipment drivers and operators are properly licensed as required by law; 
(4)  Proof that the proposer, if awarded the franchise, will have the right to use a lawful site to dispose of the residential refuse to be collected and transported along with a letter of solid waste disposal assurance governing the next three years from the owner or operator where the solid waste is to be delivered attesting to the ability to accept and dispose of, within all bounds of applicable law, the solid waster to be delivered for disposal and describing what arrangements are in place to do so; and 
(5)  Proof of general liability insurance and workers' compensation as prescribed in this chapter. 
(g)  The franchise authorized by this chapter shall continue in force for a period of three years from the date of authorization, unless terminated earlier as provided for in this chapter or franchise agreement; provided, however, that within ten days after the passage of this chapter the franchisee initially authorized by the governing authority shall file with the city manager in writing its unconditional acceptance of this franchise and promise to comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms, and conditions of this chapter. 
(h)  The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees as a result of the grant of this franchise. Such indemnification shall be for, but not limited to, negligence on the part of the franchisee in the maintenance and operation of its refuse collection services. 
(i)  The franchisee shall pay all expenses incurred by the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees in defending itself or themselves with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (h) above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses, such as attorney's fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or his assistants or any employees of the city. 
(j)  A certificate showing that insurance coverage has been obtained and is currently in force and effect shall be filed with the city manager prior to the commencement of service by the franchisee and within 30 days of the anniversary date of the policy in each and every year. 
(k)  The franchisee shall maintain insurance with a reputable company or companies licensed to do business in the State of Georgia to protect the city and the franchisee from any and all claims, injury or damage to the persons or property, both real and personal, caused directly or indirectly by the operation of the refuse collection service. The amount of such insurance shall be equivalent to that maintained by the city but, in no event, shall the insurance be less than $300,000.00 for property damage, per occurrence, $500,000.00 for personal injury, per person, and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury per occurrence. Workmen's compensation insurance shall also be maintained as required by the laws of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-6. - Termination of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the city by virtue of this franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to terminate or cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee hereunder in the event that the franchisee: 
(1)  Violates any provision of this franchise or any rule, order, or determination of the city or the governing authority pursuant to this franchise, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect; 
(2)  Revocation of any permit, license, or other permission from any governmental authority necessary to engage in the collection, transportation, and disposal of residential refuse or the failure to timely obtain a renewal of any such permit, license, or other permission; 
(3)  Violation of any law applicable to the collection, transportation, and disposal of residential refuse, including all rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and any rules of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency; 
(4)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt; 
(5)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city or the customers served; 
(6)  Franchisee has a change in the ownership of 50 percent or more of its stock, without the city's consent; or 
(7)  As otherwise provided for in a franchise agreement provided that no provisions in the franchise agreement may override or conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Such termination and cancellation shall be by resolution duly adopted after 30 days notice to the franchisee and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under this franchise or any provision of law. In the event that such termination and cancellation depends upon a finding of fact, such findings of fact as made by the governing authority or its designee shall be conclusive. Provided however, that before this franchise may be terminated and canceled under this section, the franchisee must be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the governing authority. 
(c)  Upon such a termination, the governing authority, within its discretion, may adopt such temporary measures as deemed necessary to continue to provide these waste collection, transportation, and disposal services and as otherwise is deemed necessary to protect the public health, welfare, and safety until such time as a new franchise can be established. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-7. - Participation required. 
Except where provided otherwise in this chapter, all single-family dwellings within the city are required to comply with this chapter and may utilize only the services of the franchisee for the collection, transportation, and disposal of any solid waste. Exempt from this requirement of participation are unoccupied single-family dwellings, defined as a single-family dwelling that has been unoccupied continuously for a period of not less 60 days. Satisfactory proof must be provided to the city by the person wishing to claim this exemption. Should the city determine that false, fraudulent, or misleading information has been provided in an effort to utilize the exemption provided in this provision, then the owner of the property shall be assessed and required to pay all solid waste charges imposed by this chapter as if the property had been occupied for the full extent of the claimed period of unoccupancy. This assessment shall also be a charge and lien against the real property for which said fee is charged and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes or other assessments. In addition to any other applicable law, the owner of the property may also be fined as provided for in section 26-12. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-8. - Pre-collection practices. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any residential premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  Each residence shall be provided by the franchisee with one 90-gallon roll-a-way poly-cart (hereinafter "cart"), or a smaller roll-a-way cart if requested by the customer as well as such container(s) as necessary for purposes of storing items subject to recycling. All containers shall be durable, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodent-proof, and easily cleanable. Each cart shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers. Carts and containers that do not conform to these specifications or which have defects causing waste to be scattered upon the ground during collection or which hamper or injure the persons collecting the refuse shall be promptly replace. All refuse to be collected shall be free from liquid and placed in water tight plastic bags and the top secured and placed within the cart or recycling container(s) provided for each residence. All carts and recycling containers shall be kept clean and free of accumulated refuse or wastes and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent the creation of a nuisance. 
(2)  The franchisee shall distribute to all customers written instructions on collection practices and requirements. 
(3)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property occupied by him or public thoroughfares adjoining his property. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to place or cause to be placed in any refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable product, toxic waste, medical or quarantined waste products or any other dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(5)  The disposal of wearing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed will be at additional expense to the resident. Such refuse should not be placed inside the cart for routine collection. The resident should contact the franchisee and arrange for special collection of these materials. 
(6)  Ashes shall be placed and maintained in separate containers. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to ascertain that all ashes are cool and that no hot coals remain. 
(7)  Yard waste or trimmings will be at additional expense to the resident and subject to the requirements of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-9. - Storing refuse. 
(a)  No person shall place any refuse in any street, alley, or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the city except it be in proper containers for collection or under express approval granted by the franchisee. Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of water. 
(b)  Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-10. - Collection practices. 
(a)  Refuse accumulated by residents shall be collected at curbside once each week. The day of collection shall be established by mutual agreement of the city and the franchisee. The franchisee shall observe three annual holidays. They are as follows: New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. Should one of these holidays fall on a collection day, the collection day shall be the following day. 
(b)  There shall be no collections before 7:00 a.m. or after sunset. 
(c)  The franchisee will provide routine maintenance or replacement of carts and recycling containers due to reasonable wear and tear. The customer shall be responsible for payment for any cart or recycling container which must be replaced as a result of abuse, neglect, loss, or theft. 
(d)  The Franchisee should attempt to handle missed pick ups on the same day, if reported by 2:00 p.m. All missed pick ups shall be corrected within 24 hours. 
(e)  Carts and recycle containers shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on scheduled pick up days. Carts and recycle containers shall not be placed curbside more than 12 hours prior to the regularly scheduled pick up day and shall be removed within 12 hours following the regularly scheduled pick up day. Carts and recycle containers shall be placed within 15 feet of the curb or edge of the payment/asphalt of the street or alley and shall be accessible to the side of the street or alley from which the collection is made. However, carts and recycle containers shall not be placed in or on the surface of the roadway, street or alley. 
(f)  Persons who are unable to place their cart or recycle containers at curbside due to physical handicaps may apply to the city for an exemption and, if approved, may receive back door service at their residence at the same monthly rate for curbside service. All persons residing within said residence must be physically handicapped and approved by the city before this service is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-11. - Fees charged for services provided. 
(a)  The city shall have the power, right and authority to assess, levy, collect and enforce monthly a solid waste collection, transportation, and disposal assessment (hereinafter "sanitation assessment") in such amount or amounts as provided from time to time by resolution of the governing authority as well as a deposit and administrative fee to be paid by those required to participate in the solid waste program established by this chapter, such fees to be paid in connection with and prior to the commencement of solid waste collection, transportation and disposal services to defray the reasonable costs incurred by the city in establishing and operating this program. The monthly assessment and the deposit and administrative fee shall be charged to the occupant of the residential property being serviced. This monthly assessment as well as the deposit and administrative fee shall also be a charge and lien against the real property for which said fee was charged and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes or other assessments. 
(b)  The governing authority may in its discretion establish a separate, reduced monthly charge for customers age 65 or older. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the governing authority, the city manager and/or his designee is directed to establish guidelines for a reduced monthly charge or waiver of any fee prescribed by this chapter for those who can demonstrate a financial hardship. 
(d)  A ten percent penalty shall be assessed on all accounts considered delinquent. 
(e)  All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the fifteenth day of the month in which the monthly statement is issued. All delinquent accounts shall be assessed a ten percent penalty and are subject to stoppage of service without notice. If a delinquent account is not paid within 30 days, all refuse collection may cease for that account. Service shall be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees for the period of collection and of the period of non-collection plus penalties. Additionally, the city shall have the right to collect a deposit equal to two months of service fees before reestablishing sanitation collection at any property on which sanitation collection was discontinued due to nonpayment or late payment of the fee required by this chapter. 
(f)  The stoppage of services hereinbefore authorized for non-payment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in any manner provided by law for the collection of a municipal claim and may be enforced in any manner provided by law for recovery of same. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-12. - Penalties for customers who fail to comply; liens. 
Excepting the failure to pay the monthly charges assessed for the services to be provided, occupants of single-family dwellings violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. Such fines shall also be a charge and lien against the real property for which said fee was charged and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes or other assessments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-13. - Enforcement. 
The city manager or his designee is entrusted with implementation, administration, and enforcement of this chapter. The City of Hiram, Georgia Police Department is also authorized to issue, as needed, any citations for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-14. - Collection of waste other than residential refuse. 
The franchise and services provided pursuant to this chapter apply only to the collection, transportation, and disposal of residential refuse as defined in this chapter. The services provided by this chapter do not encompass the collection, transportation, and disposal of yard waste and trimmings, white goods (e.g., appliances and furniture), or any waste constituting or containing any hazardous waste. Each occupant or owner of property encompassed by this chapter must make separate arrangements with the franchisee for the collection, transportation, and disposal of such other waste items or product and will be subject to and responsible for the franchisee's fee schedule it charges for the collection, transportation, and disposal of same. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-15. - Limited phase-in period for customers obligated by contract to another solid waste service provider; penalties. 
In recognition that at the time of adoption of this chapter, some city residents in single-family dwellings may be already obligated by contract to another person or entity for the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste, the city prescribes the following: 
(1)  Such residents will not be charged the fees prescribed by this chapter and shall not be required to participate in the exclusive franchise established hereby until expiration of such a contact, provided that the contract is lawful and enforceable and was properly executed prior to adoption of this chapter. 
(2)  Such residents may not avoid, evade or be relieved of participation in the exclusive franchise established by this chapter, including payment of the fees associated with the exclusive franchise, by renewing or extending contracts after the adoption of this chapter that predate the adoption of the chapter. 
(3)  Within 30 days of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derived, each resident who wishes to be exempted from participation because of the existence of a contract with another person or entity for the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste shall provide the city manager a copy of the contract and identify the date of expiration of the contract. Any resident who fails to do so will be required to pay the fees imposed by the city for the franchise regardless of the existence of any contract with another person or entity for the collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste. 
(4)  If such a contract is terminated earlier than its prescribed term, the resident is required to immediately notify the city manager. Upon such a termination, the resident shall be obligated to utilize the services of the franchisee and to pay the monthly charge required by the city, subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  If such a contract is terminable at will by the resident, then the resident shall terminate the contract immediately or as prescribed in the contract and immediately notify the city manager. Upon such a termination, the resident shall be obligated to utilize the services of the franchisee and to pay the monthly charge required by the city, subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  All fees imposed or accruing to a resident by operation of these provisions shall also be a charge and lien against the real property for which said fee was charged and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes or other assessments. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-16. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reasons held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 26A-17. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-7, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-2013) 
Chapter 27 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-05, §§ 1 (Exh. A), adopted Feb. 7, 2017, repealed Ch. 27 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 27 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 27, §§ 27-1—27-9, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-10, §§ 1(27-2-A—27-2-I), adopted Sept. 3, 2013. 

Sec. 27-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as "The City of Hiram Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of means engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 27-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 27-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (a division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources) for coverage under the state general permit. 
N.O.T. means a notice of termination form provided by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (a division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources) to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have means: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(4.1), to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 27-4(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 27-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsection 27-4(b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection (b) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15)—(17) below, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 27-4(b)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; and 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in Rule 391-3-7-.01(r) of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 27-4(b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or its designee without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Hiram and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 27-5(c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 27-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with Rule 391-3-7-.10 of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 27-4(c)(15)—(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 27-5(b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 27-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 27-4(c)(15)—(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 27-5(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Hiram or its designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(c)  The City of Hiram shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 27-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(1) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council of the City of Hiram within 14 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Sec. 27-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the day of February 7, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1(Exh. A), 2-7-2017) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— City has power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal authority to regulate streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3. 

Sec. 28-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general penalties provisions appearing in section 1-12. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 13; Code 1996, § 54-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Leading and riding animals on sidewalks. 
No person shall be permitted to lead, ride or drive any horse, mule or cattle of any kind upon any sidewalk of this city. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 8; Code 1996, § 54-3) 
Sec. 28-3. - Use of closed streets; removal or destruction of barricade. 
No person shall walk or drive any vehicle or drive or lead any animal over any street in the city which has been closed or blocked for the purpose of paving or repairing, nor shall any person remove or tear down any obstruction or barricade put upon any street or alley for the purpose of warning or notifying persons that such street or alley is closed. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 12; Code 1996, § 54-7) 
Sec. 28-4. - Obstructions—Generally. 
No person shall be allowed or permitted to obstruct any sidewalk or street in the city by putting any box, table steps, merchandise or any other thing thereon or to use the streets and sidewalks for the display of goods, wares or merchandise of any kind in such a manner as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Nor shall the streets or sidewalks be obstructed in any other manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 14; Code 1996, § 54-8) 
Sec. 28-5. - Same—By trash, lumber, wood, boxes, bricks or other substances. 
No person shall put any trash, lumber, wood, boxes, bricks or other substances in any street, alley or sidewalk without a permit from the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 15; Code 1996, § 54-9) 
Sec. 28-6. - Same—Danger signals to be placed as warning to public. 
Any person who shall cause any obstruction to be placed in any street, alley or sidewalk of the city, as permitted by the city, shall display at such obstruction every night such obstruction may so remain, a sufficient danger signal to warn the traveling public of such obstruction and to enable them to avoid injury from the obstruction. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 16; Code 1996, § 54-10) 
Sec. 28-7. - Obstruction of view and use—By trees, bushes and shrubs. 
No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on such property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city, so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on such street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 17; Code 1996, § 54-11) 
Sec. 28-8. - Same—Failure to remove after notice. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the police department. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 18; Code 1996, § 54-12) 
Sec. 28-9. - Objects of danger; penalty for violation of section. 
No person working, living, building or repairing, operating or in any manner of procedure, at any time, shall have on the streets or sidewalks of this city a charged electric line, wire or cord. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 19; Code 1996, § 54-13) 
Sec. 28-10. - Driveway construction; permit required. 
No person shall construct, establish, open, grade, or in any manner form or use a driveway, or other opening from private property into any street, highway or thoroughfare in the city, other than driveways to personal residences, without first obtaining a permit from the city. Before a permit is granted to a person so desiring to establish a driveway, the city manager or his designee will inspect the site, determine the appropriate location, and make any necessary requirements that will be required to be met. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 20; Code 1996, § 54-14) 
Sec. 28-11. - Driveway culverts. 
All driveway culverts must be installed so as not to impede the natural flow of water through the existing drain. Water and electricity will be withheld from houses until this section is complied with. 
(Code 1965, ch. 13, § 22; Code 1996, § 54-15) 
Chapter 30 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4), (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1996, § 62-1; Ord. No. 84-60, § 1, 11-5-1984; Ord. No. 88-37, 8-1-1988) 
State Law reference— Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 30-2. - Prohibition of certain truck traffic; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  No truck having more than a total of six wheels or more than two axles shall be operated on any portion of any city street, except that such trucks may be so operated to reach a bona fide destination on or adjacent to one of such streets. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park such a truck except while actually engaged in loading or unloading of merchandise. 
(c)  At night. The parking of trucks having a capacity of more than one-half ton on any street shall be prohibited for more than one hour between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. at night, unless the truck is in charge of an attendant who is awake during all hours; and such parked truck shall be properly lighted. 
(d)  In the daytime. It shall be unlawful to park trucks in excess of one-half ton for more than one hour from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on city streets. 
(e)  Residential areas at night. It shall be unlawful to park or stand any truck of a weight in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight or any other freight conveyance of a weight in excess of 8,000 pounds gross weight except authorized emergency vehicles on any city street within the residential area of the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time and 7:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time for a period longer than one-half hour. 
(f)  No commercial vehicle, tractor, tractor-trailer, 18-wheeler or bus exceeding 8,000 pounds gross weight may be parked for overnight or weekend storage visible to the general public on properties zoned residential. The term "storage" shall not include short-term loading or unloading of such vehicles during daylight hours or otherwise in accordance with normally accepted commercial practices. Daylight hours shall mean the period between 30 minutes after dawn and 30 minutes after sunset. This section shall not apply to privately owned recreational vehicles which may be parked at a person's own residence. However, such vehicles must also comply with the other provisions of this Code. 
(g)  Areas designated for parking of trucks associated with or serving commercial establishments shall be paved and installed with proper drainage. 
(Code 1996, § 62-2; Ord. No. 91-4, § 2, 1-7-1991) 
Secs. 30-3—30-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Sec. 30-23. - Minimum, maximum speed limit; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  The minimum and maximum speed limits on city streets shall be established by the governing authority, from time to time, and as designated by a traffic control device or a traffic sign posted on or at the entrance of that roadway giving notice of the speed limit. 
(b)  Speed limits and locations approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation within the City of Hiram are adopted as the List of Roads for the City of Hiram Number 04-15-15. These approved and adopted speed limits are enforceable within the City of Hiram pursuant to the speed detection device permit issued by the department of public safety using the list of roads as the controlling document. 
(c)  Erecting and maintaining the speed limit signs in all state routes and U.S. highways, referred to as on-system, is the responsibility of the Georgia Department of Transportation. The City of Hiram will be responsible for installing and maintaining the appropriate speed limit signs for city roads and streets, referred to as off-system. All signs should be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished, upon conviction, as provided for by section 1-12. 
(Code 1996, § 62-31; Ord. No. 91-12, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 5-10-00, 7-3-2000; Ord. No. 2015-06, §§ 1—3, 8-4-2015) 
Chapter 32 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate and provide sewage collection and disposal systems, stormwater systems, and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6)-(7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION 

Sec. 32-19. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.1, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.2, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-21. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.3, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-22. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include utilities, water, sewer, garbage, etc. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: The city is aware of identity theft which has occurred in other places and to other businesses located in the city. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low to moderate risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and, 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.4, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-23. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall fill out a written application which shall include a photograph of the applicant and provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer as follows: 
(1)  A valid government-issued identification card; 
(2)  A valid driver's license; 
(3)  A passport; 
(4)  A school-issued identification card. 
Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and/or other filing system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. 
(c)  Notifications from consumer reporting agencies. The city does not request, receive, obtain or maintain information about its utility customers from any consumer reporting agency. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.5, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-24. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password shall be at least five characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and/or symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager or his designee and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.6, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-25. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.7, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-26. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts. Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification. Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Suspicious use or activity. Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice. Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.8, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-27. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager or his designee. If, in his discretion, the city manager deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, he shall convey this information to the city attorney of the city, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city attorney in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney of the city: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager or his designee. If, in his discretion, the city manager deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, he shall convey this information to the city attorney, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city attorney, in his discretion determines, that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city attorney: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.9, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-28. - Updating the program. 
The governing authority shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the governing authority, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the governing authority shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.10, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-29. - Program administration. 
The city manager or his designee is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager or his designee is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager or his designee to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the governing authority for consideration. 
(1)  The city manager will report to the governing authority at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and, 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city manager or his designee is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city manager or his designee shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.11, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 32-30. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the city manager or his designee shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 09, § 2-3.12, 8-4-2009) 
Secs. 32-31—32-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 32-49. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words have the specified meanings: 
City means the City of Hiram, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia Water System. 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Private facility means a water system providing drinking water to property owned only by a single owner. Examples would include a facility serving a single industrial site, or a facility serving a mobile home park where all lots are owned by a single owner. 
Public facility means a water system providing drinking water to more than one property owned by different owners. Examples would include a facility serving an industrial park with several owners, or a facility serving a subdivision with separate homeowners. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
User means a customer of the water system, or other person using the water system. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(1), 2010) 
Sec. 32-50. - Interference with city property prohibited. 
(a)  All persons are prohibited from interfering with or disturbing in any manner or form, any water meters, switches, locks, cutoffs, corporation cocks or other appliances of the city, or to appropriate or use any water after service has been cut off or discontinued for the nonpayment of the charges therefore or for other cause. The head of the household or property owner involved shall be held responsible for the violation of this section. Tampering fees of up to $500.00 shall be assessed where a meter has been disturbed, plus the fee for water used. The city reserves the right to remove a service where a meter has been tampered with and to refuse continued service to a property that has a history of violations of water service polices or ordinances. 
(b)  Unauthorized operation of a city-owned hydrant will result in a tampering fee of up to $500.00, plus the fee for water used. 
(c)  A customer's water meter may be turned off and tagged for any violation of the city water department rules and regulations or standard operating policies and procedures, which are incorporated herein by reference. 
(1)  If the tag is tampered with then a padlock will be applied and the customer must pay a $50.00 tampering fee before service can be restored. For each subsequent tampering with any tag by the same customer (whether on the same or different property), the fee shall double, to a maximum of $400.00 for the fourth and subsequent tag tampering violation. 
(2)  If the padlock is removed or other means are used to gain water service, then the customer shall pay a $100.00 tampering fee plus the cost of any damage to the lock, meter or meter setter. The meter will be removed until all monies due are paid, including any overdue bills. A cease and desist order shall be issued to the owner of record of the property served by the meter where the tamper has occurred. For each subsequent tampering with any padlock by the same customer (whether on the same or different property), the fee shall double, to a maximum of $800.00 for the fourth and subsequent lock tampering violation. 
(3)  If, after removal of the meter, an alternative means of obtaining water service is attempted (such as a "jumper" or other means), then the water service will be removed and future service will be considered as if the tampered service never existed. The property owner shall have to apply for and pay for new service, which may or may not be granted, and shall have to pay a fee of $1,000.00 prior to new service being granted. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse to provide service to any customer that may not be in the best interest of the system, including customers with: 
(1)  A history of tampering with the meter (or other portions of the system) on any property; 
(2)  A history of nonpayment of bills to the water department on any account on any property; or 
(3)  Having any unpaid bill on any former water department account on other property. 
(Code 1965, ch. 5, §§ 8, 9; Code 1996, §§ 66-38, 66-39; Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(2), 2010) 
Sec. 32-51. - Title to extensions; refusal of extensions. 
(a)  Title to all waterline extensions shall vest in the city upon completion. 
(b)  The city shall reserve the right to refuse any extension of water service, or prescribe any additional conditions, if in its judgment the proposed extension would not promote the orderly, harmonious and efficient growth and development of the city and the urban area. 
(c)  The city shall reserve the right to refuse any extension of water service to any customer with outstanding balances due or outstanding fines due. 
(Code 1965, ch. 5, §§ 2, 3; Code 1996, §§ 66-32, 66-33; Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(3), 2010) 
Sec. 32-52. - Meters required; rates. 
(a)  No water shall be furnished to any premises except through meters and shall be charged at the established rates. Each premises (including separate apartment or condominium) or separate business must have a separate water meter. When a building is subdivided, a separate water meter must be provided for each unit. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of each developer or owner of property to bear the full expense of installing required service lines to and within the developer's or owner's property for the existing system in a manner as approved by the city water department. 
(Code 1965, ch. 5, §§ 4, 5; Code 1996, §§ 66-34, 66-35; Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(4), 2010) 
Sec. 32-53. - Resale or misuse prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any water consumer to sell or permit the regular use of water by any other person or for other uses than that applied for. 
(b)  New multiple water accounts are not permitted by the city. Any person making an illegal connection to a water account is subject to termination of water service and subject to prosecution for tampering. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(5), 2010) 
Sec. 32-54. - Water rates. 
Water rates shall be as established by the governing authority, which shall also establish a schedule of deposits, delinquent penalties and fees for reinstatement of service. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-A(6), 2010) 
Secs. 32-55—32-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATELY OWNED WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 32-82. - Private facilities. 
Privately owned private facilities are permitted, subject to approval by the city manager or his designated representative. All proposed private facilities that require permitting under the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act shall require approval by the city prior to submission of permit application. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-B(1), 2010) 
Sec. 32-83. - Public facilities. 
Public facilities that are privately owned are not permitted. Water systems that serve more than one property owner shall be allowed only as publicly owned and operated systems. Furthermore, any permits for such facilities shall be issued to the city as the appropriate government agency. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-B(2), 2010) 
Secs. 32-84—32-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 32-110. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-1 to 8-2-3 is to impose water conservation restrictions; to provide definitions; to provide exemptions; to provide for penalties; to provide for related matters; to repeal any conflicting ordinances, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-C(1), 2010) 
Sec. 32-111. - Application. 
The requirements of section 32-112(a) and (b) shall apply to any residential construction or commercial construction and includes new development that may have already been initiated but structures have not yet been approved by the city, as well the repair and/or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilet or showers or both. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-C(2), 2010) 
Sec. 32-112. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Construction restrictions. No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2½ gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  Irrigation systems. All new irrigation systems, both residential and non-residential, shall have installed a rain sensor irrigation shut-off switch to prevent operation of the system during or within six hours after an adequate rain event. The term "adequate rain event," as used in this section means at least one-half inch of rainfall. 
(c)  Conservation. The city manager or his designee, with the approval of the governing authority, is authorized to implement special water conservation measures, on a case-by-case basis, during times of drought, low stream flows, interruptions in the raw water supply due to breaks or contamination; inability of the filter plants to meet demand; excessive losses or demands in the distribution system due to breaks, fires or other causes; restrictions imposed by suppliers or the state, contamination in the finished water; or any other purpose for which the curtailed use of water might be reasonably required in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the governing authority. The water conservation measures may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as swimming pool filling; watering of lawns and gardens; washing of motor vehicles; recreational uses; and other uses which the city manager or his designated representative may deem to be nonessential. The type, nature, degree, commencement and duration of restrictions or prohibitions shall be determined by the city manager or his designated representative, with the approval of the governing authority. Notice of the restrictions or prohibitions shall be publicized in such a manner as to provide adequate notice to the water customer, including but not limited to inclusion on the customer's water bill. The violation of the restriction or prohibition shall be subject to fines or penalties, upon conviction, as approved by the governing authority. 
(d)  The following occurrences are deemed to be a "waste of water" and are prohibited: 
(1)  Allowing water to escape from any premises onto the public rights-of-way, including streets and sidewalks, or upon any other person's property; 
(2)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or lawn landscaping watering device while raining; 
(3)  Operating an irrigation system or other lawn or landscaping watering device that has any broken or missing sprinkler or watering heads; 
(4)  Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler or watering head, a leaking valve, a leading outdoor faucet, a service line leak, or any other visible outside water leak within 30 days of having been provided notice of such occurrence; and 
(5)  Washing any vehicle with a hose and not having a functional water shut-off nozzle or otherwise allowing water to run continuously from a hose while washing any vehicle. 
(e)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (d) above do not apply to the following occurrences: 
(1)  Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire hydrants or from fire training activities: 
(2)  Water applied as a dust control measure as required by soil erosion and sedimentation rules; 
(3)  Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous materials where water is the appropriate method to be sued for same; 
(4)  Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident hazards when alternate methods are unavailable; 
(5)  Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the application of water is appropriate for same and where no other practical alternative is available; 
(6)  Water used for power-washing hard surfaces to alleviate safety and sanitary hazards unless prohibited by drought restrictions; 
(7)  Mobile car washes when approval or a special use permit is obtained from the city; and 
(8)  Emptying swimming pools and spas for maintenance in accordance with all applicable rules. 
(f)  If it is found that there is a waste of water in or about any premises to which water is supplied from the city system, either by willful waste or by means of a leak in any water pipe or fixture located in or upon the premises, the city may cause the water to be cut off from the premises upon reasonable notice to the occupant unless special circumstances require that such waste shall be immediately stopped. Where the water supply is cut off as herein provided, the water shall not again be turned on until all water bills and the bill for the cost of cutting off and again turning on the water shall have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-C(3), 2010; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 2017) 
Sec. 32-113. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of any existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of section 32-112(a) when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2) to (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the Paulding County building inspector. An inspection fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-C(4), 2010) 
Sec. 32-114. - Effective date. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-C(5), 2010) 
Secs. 32-115—32-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 32-142. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to protect the city's public potable water supply from actual or possible contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system. This article also provides for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control with the goal of systematically and effectively preventing contamination or pollution of the city's water system by containment. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-D(1)(A), 2010) 
Sec. 32-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air-gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level (overflow) rim of such vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch. 
Approved means accepted by the city manager or his designated representative as meeting applicable specifications stated or cited in this article or as the city manager or his designated representative, in his discretion, finds suitable for the proposed use. 
Approved backflow prevention device means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled "AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices," and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by the publication "Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices #69-2," dated March, 1969, or the most current issue thereof. Any device where approval is required by the fire marshal's office shall be listed for fire protection use as required by the National Fire Protection Association Codes, as may be amended from time to time. 
Approved tester means a person holding a currently valid certification recognized by the state environmental protection division. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters include, but are not limited to, water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These auxiliary waters may be contaminated, polluted or constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
Back pressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source. 
Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or back-siphonage. 
Backflow preventer or backflow prevention device means a device, process or means designed to prevent backflow. 
Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution system, as a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Check valve means a valve that is drip-tight in the normal direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi (pound per square inch) and the outlet pressure is zero, permitting no leakage in a reverse direction to the normal flow. The closure element of the valve is internally loaded to promote rapid, positive closure. Comprises only one component of a backflow prevention assembly. 
City means City of Hiram, Georgia and/or the City of Hiram, Georgia Water System. 
Contamination means any impairment of the quality of the City's potable water by the introduction or admission of any foreign substance, including but not limited to sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials, to a degree which degrades the quality of the potable water and creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross connection means any actual or potential physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. Alternatively, it is a connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that might allow such substances (such as gasses, liquids, or solids) to enter the potable water system and to affect the water's taste, color or odor. The term "cross connection" includes, but is not limited to, any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes. 
Cross connection control by containment means any of the following: 
(1)  At service connection. The installation of one approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control any or all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water system. 
(2)  After service connection. The installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying all or a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections within the customer's premises which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection. 
Cross connections, controlled means a cross connection that has an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Customer means any owner of premises receiving city water system service or any end-user thereof, including any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual firm, association or trust and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
Department means the City of Hiram Water System. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in current approval of a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for inline testing and maintenance. 
Hazard, degree of. A term evaluating the potential risk to public health based on available information and categorization of potential sources of contamination or pollution and the adverse effect of the contamination or pollution upon the potable water system. 
Hazard, health, means any condition, device, or practice affecting the water supply system and its operation which creates or could create, or in the judgment of the city manager or his designated representative, may create a present or future danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer or the city's potable water supply. 
Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable as to taste, odor or color or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not necessarily be dangerous to the health of the water consumer. 
Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system. A pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water system. 
Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted, in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system or pollutional hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. The term "industrial fluids system" may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(3)  Chemicals in fluid form; 
(4)  Plating acids and alkalis, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; 
(5)  Oils, gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes; or 
(6)  Contaminated natural waters emanating from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems. 
Pollution or polluted means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade the water's quality so as to constitute a hazard or to impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water's domestic use. 
Reduced pressure principle device means an assembly of two independently-acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and a field evaluation program resulting in current approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at an acceptable level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In the event that either of the check valves leak, the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable, means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water purveyor means a supplier of water, including property owners supplying water for their own use. 
Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system (i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system). If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. The term "service connection" also includes water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water system means the city water system and the customer's water system, where not specifically limited as such. The department system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the department, up to the point where the customer's system begins (at and including the water meter and any required backflow prevention devices used in conjunction therewith). The source facilities shall include all components of the facilities used in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the department's distribution system which are used in conveying department-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
Water, used, means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
Note— See also Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, § 391-3-5-.13(4); Manual of Cross-Connection Control, 9th ed., University of Southern California, 1993; Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control, American Water Works Association Manual of Water Supply Practices, Manual 14, 2nd Ed., 1990; Cross-Connection Control Manual, United States Environmental Protection Agency, June 1989. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-D(1)(B), 2010) 
Sec. 32-144. - Duties. 
(a)  Department. The city manager or his designated representative shall be primarily responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the public potable water service connection. Where appropriate, the department shall coordinate with other city personnel from building inspections, the fire department, the police department, etc., to enforce laws, rules, regulations and policies to be followed in controlling cross connections. 
(1)  Program implementation and execution. The department shall initiate a backflow prevention program and emergency plan designed to ensure that customers install, test and maintain approved backflow prevention devices where needed to protect the public water supply from potential and actual hazardous sources of cross connection. The department shall list, categorize, and prioritize for assessment potential sources of contamination or pollution by the degree of hazard they present to the public water supply. The department shall assess a customer's system by inspecting the customer's system, including cross connections and devices used, and using all information available to determine whether all appropriate devices are installed and maintained in proper working order. The department shall map and schedule inspections of installed devices and premises to ensure all devices continue to be installed an maintained in proper working order. 
(2)  Discretion. The city manager or his designated representative shall use discretion, based on the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and on the city's policy and procedures for backflow and back-siphonage prevention and cross connection control to determine whether the type of existing or proposed devices are sufficient to meet the threat of potential hazard to the city's potable water supply. 
(3)  Right to enter and to test. Pursuant to section 32-175, the city manager or his designated representative shall have the right to enter and to test, at any reasonable time, a customer's premises to inspect the piping system for cross connections and compliance with the city's backflow prevention ordinance and policy. Upon request, the customer or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspections agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. Pursuant to section 32-176, the department is authorized to seek an inspection warrant when a customer or occupant of premises refuses access. 
(4)  Notice. If, in the judgment of the city manager, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the customer' water service connection, the city manager or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at the service connection or where appropriate. 
(5)  Discontinuance of water service. The city manager or his designated representative has the authority to discontinue water service to the premises until the requirements of this article have been satisfactorily met. 
(6)  Notice to authorities. The department shall contact all appropriate federal, state and local agencies, including the county health department, upon a finding of possible contamination or pollution of the city's potable water supply. 
(b)  Customer. The customer shall immediately install approved backflow prevention device as required and directed by the department at the customer's own expense. The customer has the duty to maintain approved backflow prevention device at all times. If a device so requires, the customer shall have the device tested annually or whenever deemed necessary by the department. The customer shall retain and provide testing results performed by an approved tester to the department as requested. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain the device or to report testing results shall subject the customer to the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-D(1)(C), 2010) 
Sec. 32-145. - Requirements. 
The following requirements are part of the department's policy for protection of the water supply: 
(1)  Protection. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulation and this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested an maintained at the customer's expense, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(2)  Accessibility. The customer's system shall be readily accessible and open for inspection at all reasonable time: to authorized representatives of the department to determine whether cross connections or other structural, sanitary contamination or pollution hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. Reduced pressure backflow prevention devices and assemblies shall be readily accessible and installed in such a manner as to prevent partial C total submergence of the device or assemblies. Pit installations are prohibited. The city shall have the right to inspect and test the backflow prevention device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary, at the customer's expense. Upon a customer's failure to provide access, the department shall be authorized to seek an inspection warrant. 
(3)  Notice. When such a condition becomes known, but does not constitute an emergency, the city manager or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to such customer to install such an approved backflow prevention device at his service connection. 
(4)  Emergency hazards. When the city becomes aware of an actual emergency condition, the city water system and/or the department of public safety shall be authorized to isolate or contain the hazard or take any steps necessary to protect the public water supply. The department taking action shall give notice to the customer as soon as is reasonable, practical under the circumstances. 
(5)  Installation. An approved backflow prevention device appropriate to the degree of hazard shall also be installed by the customer at the customer's expense on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being serviced but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line whenever any the following conditions exist: 
a.  When premises have an auxiliary water supply which does not or may not have a safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the city manager. 
b.  When premises upon which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
c.  When premises have internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist. 
d.  When premises contain any service connection three-fourths inches or larger in diameter. 
(6)  Types of devices required or prohibited. The type of protective device required shall be provided by and at the expense of the customer and shall depend upon the degree of hazard on premises. 
a.  The public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device whenever any the following conditions exist: 
1.  Where there is an auxiliary water supply (unless it is already subject to another rule requiring a protective device). 
2.  Where there is any health hazard which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, at the expense of the owner of the premises. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants. 
3.  Where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection, at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
4.  Where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey or inspection, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device on each service to the premises, at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
b.  The public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved double check valve assembly whenever any of the following conditions exist: Where there is water or a substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system. 
c.  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the city manager. In addition, if a device is installed such that it directly affects fire hydrants, standpipes and/or sprinkler systems, the county fire marshal's office must approve the device prior to installation. 
d.  The customer shall install an approved thermal expansion relief device in the customer's water system whenever a backflow prevention device is installed. 
e.  Unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Compliance. Customers with pre-existing cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses, or interconnections in violation of this policy shall have a reasonable time to comply with the city manager or his designated representative's order to install an approved backflow prevention device. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to install an approved device, the deadline for compliance shall be determined by the city in consultation with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-d(1)(d), 2010) 
Secs. 32-146—32-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING; ENFORCEMENT; JUDICIAL HEARING; APPEAL 

Sec. 32-174. - Enforcement and appeal. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the city manager and/or designated representatives of the water department. Citations for violations may be issued by the city manager, the water department at the direction of the city manager or by the city police department. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this chapter shall be guilty of an offense which will be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this chapter may be punished by a minimum fine of up to $125.00 for the first occurrence, $250.00 for the second occurrence, and $500.00 for the third and subsequent occurrences, unless otherwise specified. The municipal court shall also be empowered to award restitution costs, costs of damages to water service and meters, and unpaid bill amounts, in addition to the fines listed in this subsection, as a condition of sentencing. 
(c)  Tampering fees may be assessed as specified by the city manager or his designated representative, and water service may be withheld until such fees are paid, along with prior overdue bills. The municipal court shall also be empowered to try any matter involving any tampering. 
(d)  All persons are prohibited from interfering with or disturbing in any manner or form, any water meter, fire hydrant, locks, cutoffs, corporation cocks, or other appurtenances of the water system or to appropriate or use any water without first contracting with the system for such use or after service has been cut off or discontinued for the nonpayment of the charges therefore or for other cause. Any person violating this provision shall be prosecuted for tampering. 
(e)  Any person may appeal any convictions or final orders of the municipal court by certiorari in writing to the county superior court within 30 days of any such conviction or final order. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(1), 2010) 
Sec. 32-175. - Inspection; entry of premises. 
The city manager or his designee, and other authorized representatives of state and federal regulatory agencies, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city manager or his designated representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. The city manager or his designated representative shall also have the right to enter all private properties through which the city holds a utility easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work on such easement shall be done in full accord with the terms of the utility easement pertaining to such property. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city manager or his designated representative shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city manager or his designated representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The city manager may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designated representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(2), 2010) 
Sec. 32-176. - Search warrants; inspection warrants. 
If the authorized city representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city manager or his authorized representative may seek issuance of a search warrant or inspection warrant from the municipal court, the county magistrate court, or the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(3), 2010) 
Sec. 32-177. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any permit or order issued hereunder, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager may issue a notice of violation to the user and/or owner directing them to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user and/or owner to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation. 
(b)  Issuance of a notice shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. Failure to comply with a notice shall subject the user to having water service removed or cut-off. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(4), 2010) 
Sec. 32-178. - Unpaid charges and fees. 
Unpaid charges, fees (of any sort), and penalties shall, after 15 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 15 percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1½ percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. Water service may be cut-off until all such fees and charges are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(5), 2010) 
Sec. 32-179. - Termination of service; creation of lien for unpaid amounts; interest. 
In addition to, or in lieu of, taking any other action available under this chapter, in order to enforce the operation of this chapter, the city shall have the power and authority to enter upon the property of any user who has violated any provision of this article following issuance of a municipal court decision to terminate the user's wastewater and/or water service in any manner deemed necessary and appropriate by the city. In the event of such termination under this article, the city shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provisions of this chapter. Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-E(6), 2010) 
Secs. 32-180—32-196. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REMEDIES; INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; ETC. 

Sec. 32-197. - Injunctive relief. 
When the city manager or his designated representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any permit or order issued hereunder, the city manager or his designated representative may petition the county superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate. The city manager may also seek restitution, and shall be entitled to attorney's fees for bringing any successful action wherein relief is granted. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-F(1), 2010) 
Sec. 32-198. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city manager or his designated representative may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-F(2), 2010) 
Secs. 32-199—32-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES, JUDICIAL HEARING, APPEAL OR JUDICIAL REVIEW 

Sec. 32-226. - Administrative remedies. 
Any customer, entity, or person found to be in violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter by any court decision, administrative action, enforcement, or order by the city including, but not limited to, termination of service shall entitle such customer, entity, or person to appeal any such administrative action, enforcement, or order by filing for certiorari with the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 27-1, § 27-1-G(1), 2010) 
Secs. 32-227—32-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES ON PUBLIC WAYS 

Sec. 32-246. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Application to governing authority. No person, including any utility, shall enter upon any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, bridge, public way or property belonging to or owned by the city for the purpose of installing, constructing, or erecting thereon any pipes, pipeline, conduit, cable, wire, pole, frame, tower, pump, switching device, control device, or any other object whatsoever in connection with the furnishing of any public utility or public service until such person shall have applied for and received from the governing authority, a permit authorizing such installation, construction or erection. 
(b)  Contents of application. Application for a permit shall be made in written form describing the work to be performed and the proposed location of the utility within the public way. The proposed location shall be identified on a sketch or map drawn to scale and in sufficient detail to identify the boundaries of the public way and the location of the proposed work within such boundaries. 
(c)  Safety measures required. As a condition precedent to the granting of the permit, the applicant shall agree to provide such safety measures and devices as the governing authority and the State of Georgia may deem necessary for the protection of the public during the period of construction. 
(d)  Specification of commencement and completion dates. The applicant for a permit shall specify within the application expected dates for commencement and completion of the work for which the permit is requested. 
(e)  Work requirements. Any work performed pursuant to the permit shall be in workman-like manner and in such fashion as to restore the public way to the same or better condition as existed prior to commencement of work, and failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(f)  Failure to acquire permit or comply with section. Failure to obtain the required permit or to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute an offense which, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12. 
(g)  "Public way" and "utility" defined. When used in this article, the term "public way" means any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, bridge, public way or property belonging to or owned by the city; and the term "utility" means any pipe, pipeline, conduit, cable, wire, pole, frame, tower, pump, switching device, control device, and any other object whatsoever used in the furnishing of a public utility or public service. 
(h)  Permit form. The utility permit form is adopted as the official form for application under subsection (b) of this section. A copy of such application form is on file in the city offices. 
(i)  Authority to review; approve or disapprove; oversee compliance with article. Authority to receive, review, approve and disapprove applications, as well as to oversee compliance with this article is delegated to the county engineer. 
(Code 1996, § 66-61; Ord. of 8-19-1991) 
Sec. 32-247. - Placement of utilities. 
All utilities shall be planned and installed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Water. Installations of the water department shall be four feet from the edge of the pavement or back of the curb at a depth of 48 inches on the south and west side of the road. 
(2)  Telephone. Installations for telephone service shall be two feet from the edge of the pavement, at a depth of two feet on the south and west side of the road. 
(3)  Cable TV. Installations for cable TV service shall be one foot from the edge of the pavement, at a depth of one foot. 
(4)  Gas service. Installations for gas service shall be three feet from edge of pavement, at a depth of three feet on the north and east side of the road. 
(5)  Road repair. When possible, any utility crossing a city street shall be done by boring under the road. However, if the need to ditch across the road becomes necessary, complete repair to the damaged road must be done. 
(6)  Underground power. Installation of underground power shall occur only on at least a 60-foot right-of-way and be eight feet off the pavement (curb and gutter) and 42 inches deep on both sides. 
(7)  Locate wire devices. All utilities must use locate wire devices. 
(Code 1996, § 66-62; Ord. of 8-19-1991) 
Secs. 32-248—32-272. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120. 

Sec. 32-273. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Code 1996, § 34-31; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 32-274. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Code 1996, § 34-32; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 2) 
Sec. 32-275. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle, the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead, and the radius of which is 1,500 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 34-33; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 3) 
Sec. 32-276. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Code 1996, § 34-34; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 4) 
Sec. 32-277. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 32-276: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drainfields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 32-276; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; and 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Code 1996, § 34-35; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 5) 
Sec. 32-278. - Administration of wellhead protection zone. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the zoning ordinance is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Code 1996, § 34-36; Ord. of 5-1-1995, § 6) 
Chapter 34 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Governing authority means the council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, of which the mayor is a part. 
Operator means the individual driver operating a taxicab on behalf of an owner. 
Owner means any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity conducting a business providing taxicab services for hire by the public. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
Taxicab means any passenger-carrying vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for hire which does not have a fixed termini, including, but not limited to, any unmarked automobiles used in the business of transporting passengers for hire by contract or requested special services that do not have fixed termini. 
Taximeter means a device that automatically calculates, at a predetermined rate and indicates the charge for hire of a vehicle. Taxicabs operating with non-electronic taximeters shall furnish a sign, approved by the city, immediately adjacent to the taximeter which explains the way the fare shall be calculated if the taximeter reaches its highest fare before the passenger's destination is reached. This sign shall be pointed out to the passenger by the driver at the beginning of the trip. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-02) 
Sec. 34-2. - Operation of taxicab to be in compliance with chapter. 
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall operate a taxicab in the city except in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. Limousines and limousine carriers, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.1, are exempt from regulations by the provisions in this chapter. 
(Code 1965, ch. 14, § 1; Code 1996, § 70-1; Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-01) 
Sec. 34-3. - Annual business occupation tax, license and permit fees. 
(a)  In addition to the business occupation tax certificate, a license fee is hereby levied per annum for each taxicab maintained or operated, and a permit fee is hereby levied per annum for each operator's permit. The license and permit fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the governing authority. There shall be no prorating of any annual fee. 
(b)  The business occupation tax shall be in addition to a business license. The following criteria must be met to obtain a business license: 
(1)  Establishment and maintenance of a permanent office in industrial-zoned I-1 and I-2 districts of the city (districts I-1 and I-2) and area of the city. 
(2)  Submission of a copy of current lease or proof of ownership of office space. 
(3)  Establishment and maintenance of a publicly listed business telephone number. 
(4)  Maintenance of the name and home address of each operator affiliated with the company. 
(5)  Maintenance of off-street parking lot capable of accommodating all company vehicles. 
(6)  Maintenance of a file for each vehicle containing proof of all current documentation, including, but not being limited to, copies of the vehicle's registration, proof of insurance, and taxicab license. 
(7)  Possession of a valid auto insurance policy from an insurance company licensed to do insurance business within the state. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-03) 
Sec. 34-4. - Required business occupation tax certificate, licenses and permits for operation. 
(a)  Requirements of owner. No owner shall conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the city until the owner has first applied for and obtained from the city a business license for each taxicab, as well as providing to the city a required certificate of inspection for each taxicab as stated in section 34-6. The applications for the business license shall be made to the city administrative division of city hall. 
(b)  Description of business. The application of an owner to obtain a business license shall contain, among other things, a detailed description of the vehicle to be used in the business, the name of the operator thereof, and the address and telephone number of the office or call station from which the business is operated. 
(c)  Requirements of operator. Every operator shall apply for and obtain from the city a permit to operate a taxicab with the city police department. The operator shall provide proof of a valid state driver's license from the state department of driver services and a copy of the operator's driving history report (MVR) covering the last seven years from the state department of driver services. No operator shall operate a taxicab for hire in the corporate limits of the city unless such person has in his possession a valid operator's permit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-04) 
Sec. 34-5. - Required insurance coverage. 
(a)  The following shall be the required insurance coverage for vehicles for hire: 
(1)  For bodily injury or death to any one person, not less $100,000.00. 
(2)  For bodily injury or death to more than one person sustained in the same accident, not less than $300,000.00. 
(3)  For property damage resulting from any one accident, not less than $50,000.00. 
(b)  The policy shall be conditioned to protect individuals against injury or damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of the holder of an operator's permit. Additional operators or new operators hired after issuance of the business license are required to be included as an insured operator by a rider to the policy prior to the issuance of an operator's permit. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-05) 
Sec. 34-6. - Standards for taxicab vehicles. 
(a)  The following standards are applicable for a license to be issued to an owner of the business for the operation of each taxicab: 
(1)  Ages of vehicles. The owner is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business by an operator is no more than ten years old. 
(2)  Annual renewal. All fees for taxicab operator permits and taxicab licenses are due no later than January 1 of each year. 
(3)  Certificate of inspection. A certificate of inspection completed on forms provided by the city and issued by an ASE-certified mechanic shall be located inside the taxicab at all times certifying that the taxicab and equipment therein are safe and in compliance with applicable law. This certificate must be renewed every year and the operator of a taxicab shall be required to keep his taxicab in safe condition conforming to all laws under penalty of having his permit to operate a taxicab suspended or revoked. 
(b)  The police department may conduct random inspections to ensure the safe condition of a taxicab for the welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-06) 
Sec. 34-7. - Additional vehicles. 
The owner of a taxi business shall register with the city police department each additional vehicle put in use as a taxicab, and the same shall be subject to inspection and registration as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-07) 
Sec. 34-8. - Operators; qualifications. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a taxicab business to file with the city administration the names and addresses, age, and physical description of all persons employed as operators. All operators shall hold licenses from the state department of driver services as drivers of vehicles for hire and operator permits issued by the police department. No person shall be employed or shall drive a taxicab who has within the past seven years, been convicted of, pled guilty to, or entered a pleas of nolo contendere to any sexual offense as set out in O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 6, to the offense of driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, to any open container violations, to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages or possession or receiving of stolen property, battery, or the violation of a spirituous, vinous, or malt beverage statute, or if the operator has been convicted of an offense of causing a vehicular homicide. No operator can be issued a taxi operator's permit if the operator has received three or more moving violations in the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  All fees for permits issued to an operator of a taxicab are due no later than January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-08) 
Sec. 34-9. - Taxi stands; parking 
Operators of taxicabs shall only park taxicabs in any areas marked by the city as taxi stands. The parking of taxicabs shall be subject at all times to regulation by the police department and direction of a police officer when desirable for the relief of an emergency traffic condition. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-09) 
Sec. 34-10. - Information to be displayed. 
(a)  The operator of each taxicab shall have posted in his taxicab, in a conspicuous place, on the inside thereof, a map or street guide of the city, the name and photograph of the operator of the taxicab, and a schedule of fares. 
(b)  The owner is responsible for ensuring that each taxicab used in active business bears on the outside the name of the business/owner and business telephone number, which must be permanently affixed and a outside dome light on the top of the roof of the taxicab and readily visible to the public on both sides of the vehicle, and a dome light on the roof which must be at least six inches in height, permanently affixed to the roof, and bear the term "taxi" or the company name. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-10) 
Sec. 34-11. - Owners responsible for violations by operators. 
The business owner is responsible for violations of this chapter by the taxicab operators of the business owner, whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors, which violations shall be an offense. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-11) 
Sec. 34-12. - Notice of denial of license. 
In the event that an application is denied, the police chief or his designee shall, within 30 days, provide the applicant with written notice stating the reason for denial of the taxicab license. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-12) 
Sec. 34-13. - Suspension or revocation of an owner's license. 
No license issued to an owner may be transferred or assigned. 
(1)  Each license granted hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any rule or regulation of the city now in force or hereafter adopted. 
(2)  Whenever the police chief or his designee determines there is cause to suspend or revoke a license of an owner issued hereunder, the police chief shall give the owner ten days' written notice of intention to recommend suspension or revocation of the license to the city manager. A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
a.  The original application contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
b.  Failure to pay all fees taxes, or other charges imposed by the provision of this chapter; 
c.  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to an owner as holder of a license under this chapter; 
d.  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse or allowing an operator to operate in the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter; 
e.  Allowing the operator to drive or operate a taxicab within the city for the owner when the owner has been made aware by the city that the operator is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
f.  For violation of any part of this chapter applicable to the owner. 
(3)  The police chief or his designee shall conduct a hearing to hear evidence relevant to the alleged violation. 
a.  At the hearing, the city proceeds first and presents all evidence and argument in support of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license issued hereunder. 
b.  After the city's presentation, the owner may present evidence and argument as to why the license issued to the owner should not be suspended or revoked. 
c.  The police chief or his designee shall have the right to ask questions of any party at any time. 
d.  After hearing all of the evidence and arguments of the parties, the police chief or his designee shall render a decision which shall be final unless the owner files a written appeal to the city manager within 30 days of the date of the decision. The city manager shall conduct a hearing on any such appeal within 30 days from the receipt by the city manager of a timely written appeal. The city manager shall render a written final decision on any such appeal within ten days from the hearing of any such appeal. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-13) 
Sec. 34-14. - Revocation of a taxi operator permit. 
A taxi operator may have his permit to drive a taxi in the city revoked by the chief of police for loss of qualifications or if an operator has been convicted of having at least three moving violations in any 12 consecutive month period or has had a suspension or revocation entered on the operator's driver's license record with the state. Any such suspension or revocation by the chief of police may be appealed in writing to the city manager within 30 days of any such revocation or suspension. The city manager shall conduct a hearing on any such appeal within 30 days from the receipt by the city manager of a timely written appeal. The city manager shall render a written final decision on any such appeal within ten days from the hearing of any such appeal. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-14) 
Sec. 34-15. - Penalty for violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this chapter or any part thereof shall be punishable as an offense, and the municipal court shall be authorized to hear and adjudicate any such violation and upon the entry of a plea of guilty, a determination of guilty, or entry of a nolo contendere plea to impose a sentence of incarceration of up to 60 days or impose a fine of up to $1,000.00, or a combination of both incarceration and fine, for each violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-15) 
Sec. 34-16. - Appeals 
Any appeal of a final decision of the city manager or the municipal court may be appealed in writing by certiorari within 30 days to the superior court. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2012, § 70-16) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF HIRAM, GEORGIA 
An Ordinance regulating within the City of Hiram, Georgia the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, mining, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities, and boundaries thereof; defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration and amendment; defining the powers and duties of the City Council of Hiram, Georgia; providing penalties for violations, repealing conflicting ordinances; and for other purposes. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city as adopted by the city's governing authority on July 3, 2012. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, the city is included as a participant in the county's comprehensive plan as adopted March 23, 1992. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
The City Council, of Hiram , Georgia, pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections and, while reserving the power of zoning, authorizes Paulding County, Georgia and the Department's, Commissions, Committees, Inspectors and Boards (including but not limited to the Paulding county, Georgia Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Commission, Development Waiver Review Committee, Departments of Community Development, Public Works, and Transportation) to perform certain acts, recommendations, functions, and/or requirements on behalf of the City of Hiram, Georgia as stated below: 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the city of Hiram, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - [DEFINITIONS] 

Sec. A. - Interpretations. 
For the purpose of interpreting this Ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." The word "maps", "zoning map", or "Hiram Zoning Map" means the "Official Zoning Maps of Hiram, Georgia." 
Sec. B. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein all words used in this Ordinance shall carry their customary meaning as defined by a standard dictionary. 
(1)  Accessory building or structure: A building or structure subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot or property and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such structure or building is built with or after the construction of the principal building. Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building or structure shall be considered part of the principal building. 
(2)  Accessory retail uses: Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, motel, hotel, apartment development, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which such activities are accessory, provided that the floor space used or to be used for such secondary uses shall be limited to a total of twenty-five (25) square feet per dwelling unit in an apartment development or twenty-five (25) square feet per room in a hotel or motel, or ten (10) percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, and provided that: 
a.  Every public entrance to such a use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; 
b.  No show window, advertising, or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure; and 
c.  No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure. 
However, the requirements of (1) and (2) above shall not apply to restaurants and cafeterias secondary to a hotel or motel and office building or institutional use; these secondary uses may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. The following secondary uses are permitted: barbershops, beauty shops, laundry and dry cleaning pickup and distribution stations and other similar personal service establishments; drugstores; bookstores; florists; convenience food stores; gift shops; cafeterias and restaurants; private clubs; laundry facilities for the convenience of residents; newsstands. However, the total net floor space for such secondary building or structure uses shall be limited to six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(3)  Accessory uses: Uses subordinate to the principal use or building on a lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building, provided any such use is established with or after the construction of the principal building. Such uses include: garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, Jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses, playgrounds, and the like. 
(4)  Adult entertainment establishment: Any adult bookstore, adult business, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, bath house and massage parlors, erotic entertainment/dance establishment, encounter center or rap establishment, or escort bureau, or introduction service as defined in the Ordinance regarding Adult Entertainment Establishments in the City of Hiram, Georgia, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia and as amended or may be amended in the future, and the premises on which defined establishments operate or on which defined activities occur. 
(5)  Agriculture: Land shall be considered used for agriculture if the raising of crops or animals is a principal use of the property. 
(6)  Agricultural farm stand: A structure not greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet for the sale and display of farm products raised on premises. 
(7)  Agricultural produce stand: A structure not greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet for the purpose of seasonal sales of agricultural products. 
(8)  Alley: A public or private way, at the rear of side of property, permanently reserved as a means of secondary vehicular access to abutting property. Frontage on said alley shall not be construed as satisfying the requirements of this ordinance related to frontage on a dedicated street. 
(9)  Ancillary retail sales (industrial districts): Retail sale of goods and services which is secondary in nature to the primary industrial use of the property in so much that the goods for sale have been produced on site or are in storage at the site for planned distribution to other areas. The ancillary retail sale of goods shall only be conducted as part of the permitted industrial use and shall not be a free-standing business. 
(10)  Animal shows: Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven (7) days. 
(11)  Arcade: A building or part of a building in which five (5) or more pinball machines, video games, or other children's rides or other similar player-operated amusement devices are maintained, not including a commercial recreation restaurant. 
(12)  Automobile service station (gas, filling station): A building or structure used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories, and supplies, including installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto; facilities for washing and for chassis and gear lubrication of vehicles are permitted if enclosed in a building. 
(13)  Automotive paint and body repair shops: An establishment for restoring auto bodies, painting, or refinishing with all activities carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(14)  Automotive repair: Any building, premises, and land in which or upon a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair, or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered; provided such activities must be conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building. 
(15)  Automotive salvage and wrecking yards: Any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
(16)  Basement: A portion of the building partly underground which has more than one-half (½) of its height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground; and not deemed a story unless the ceiling is six (6) feet or more above the grade. 
(17)  Bed and breakfast facility: Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to transients for compensation; and provided the proprietor of the dwelling resides on the premises. 
(18)  Bio-medical waste transfer and disposal facility: A facility engineered and designed for the collection and/or transfer of bio-medical waste products such as used gauze, syringes, needles, bandages, test-tubes, surgical wastes from a collector vehicle to a larger transport vehicle to another destination for incineration or disposal. 
(19)  Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
(20)  Board of Commissioners: The Board of Commissioners of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(21)  Board of Zoning Appeals: The Zoning Board of Appeals of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(22)  Boarding house: A building, house, or portion thereof, where persons reside and meals are provided to persons, who are not members of the operator's family, for compensation. 
(23)  Buffer: A barrier which is created by the use of trees or other acceptable plant or vegetative material alone or in combination with berms, fencing, or walls used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, and/or dissimilar uses. 
(24)  Buffer, natural/undisturbed: An existing natural barrier which contains a stand of evergreen trees or other acceptable vegetative material with a density or intensity which in the opinion of the Planning staff meets the intent of the definition of buffer. 
(25)  Buffer, planted/landscaped: A planted natural barrier which contains a stand of evergreen trees or other acceptable vegetative material with a density or intensity which in the opinion of the Planning staff meets the intent of the definition of buffer. 
(26)  Building: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or personal property of any kind. 
(27)  Building, accessory: See Accessory Building or Structure. 
(28)  Building height (height of structure or building) : : The vertical distance measured from the grade at the structure to the highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level of the underside of the rafters between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
(29)  Building, principa:l A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
(30)  Caliper: The diameter of a tree measured at a point 4 and ½ feet above natural grade. 
(31)  Car wash: A building, or portion thereof, where automobiles are washed with the use of a chain conveyor and blower, automated or mechanized washers, or hand-held steam-cleaning device. 
(32)  Christmas tree sales: Retail sales of Christmas trees between Thanksgiving and December twenty-sixth (26th). 
(33)  Church: A place where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
(34)  City: City of Hiram, Georgia 
(35)  City Council: The Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia 
(36)  City Hall: The Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(37)  City Manager: The City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager of City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(38)  Circuses and carnivals: Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven (7) days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility. 
(39)  Clinic: A "medical or dental clinic" is an organization of specializing physicians or dentists, or both, who have their offices in a common building. A clinic shall include laboratory facilities in conjunction with normal clinic services. 
(40)  Club or lodge: Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
(41)  Commercial indoor recreation uses: Indoor recreational uses such as bowling alleys, driving ranges, batting cages, shooting ranges, and the like. 
(42)  Commercial outdoor recreation uses: Outdoor recreation uses such as baseball and softball batting cages, shooting ranges, miniature golf, putt-putt golf, and the like. 
(43)  Commercial recreation restaurant: Any establishment which provides as a principal use the combination of family-oriented recreation and on-premises dining where neither the recreation nor the on-premises dining is clearly accessory or incidental to the operation of the other. It may include but is not limited to: 
a.  Television and motion pictures; 
b.  Sound and sight systems; 
c.  Mechanical and/or electronic operated games (subject to applicable licensing requirements); 
d.  Animated mechanical devices and/or rides; and 
e.  Live entertainment. 
(44)  Commission: Board of Commissioners of Paulding County, Georgia 
(45)  Community Development: The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(46)  Community fair: A festival or fair provided that any activity is conducted at least two hundred (200) feet from any property line; any event shall not exceed twenty-one (21) days. 
(47)  Conditional zoning: The imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this Ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks, and other non-use requirements, physical improvements to the property, and infrastructure serving the property. 
(48)  Condominium: A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis; subject to all applicable provisions of Georgia law. 
(49)  Conference center: A facility used for conferences and seminars, with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting rooms. 
(50)  Congregate personal care home: A home for adults in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to sixteen (16) persons subject to licensing by the Georgia Department of Human Resources as well as applicable licensing by the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and inspection requirements, including State of Georgia Fire Marshal or the Paulding County, Georgia Fire Department approval. 
(51)  Corral: A small enclosure for restricting animals as distinguished from a fence. 
(52)  Continuing care retirement community: An age-restricted development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care, from independent living to long-term bed care; also known as Assisted Living Community. 
(53)  Convenience food store with self-service fuel sales: Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, pre-packaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. Further there shall be no automotive repairs done on site. 
(54)  Council: Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(55)  County: Paulding County, Georgia and/or the Chairman and Board of Commissioners of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(56)  County Planner: The manager of the Planning and Zoning Division of Paulding County, Georgia, or his/her designated representative. 
(57)  Cultural facilities: Establishments that document the social and religious structures and intellectual and artistic manifestations that characterize a society and include museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens, and such similar uses of a historic, educational, or cultural interest. 
(58)  Curve: Any potion of a street right-of-way layout that is not straight or has an arc. 
(59)  Day care: 
a.  In-home day care : Child care provided within a dwelling subject to the following limitations: 
i.  The dwelling must be the primary residence of the child care provider; 
ii.  The child care provider is authorized to provide care to a maximum of six (6) children, paying or non-paying, under 18 years of age whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same dwelling as the child care provider. 
iii.  The child care shall not create a nuisance to immediately adjacent property owners; 
iv.  Off-street parking must be provided for child pick-up and drop-off; 
v.  No person other than a resident of the dwelling may be employed in the in-home day care unless so required by the State Department of Human Resources, of the State of Georgia. 
vi.  Must possess and provide to the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, a copy of the current registration/license by the Department of Human Resources, of the State of Georgia. 
vii.  Must possess a current Occupational Tax Certificate issued by the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, with approval by the Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
viii.  Children attending the day care are not housed overnight at the day care home 
b.  Group day care home: A place operated by any person(s), partnership, association, or corporation wherein care is provided to not less than seven (7) nor more than eighteen (18) children, paying or non-paying, under eighteen (18) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours without transfer of legal custody. Must possess and provide to the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, a copy of the current registration/license by the Department of Human Resources, of the State of Georgia, and must possess a current Occupational Tax Certificate issued by the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, with approval by the State Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
c.  Day care center : Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group wherein care is provided, fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, to 19 or more children, paying or non-paying, under 18 years of age. Must possess and provide to Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, a copy of the current registration/license by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, and must possess a current Occupational Tax Certificate issued by the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, with approval by the State Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(60)  Deck: A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls, generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
(61)  Designated recycling collection location: A location operated or sanctioned by the local government which may contain metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins, or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of pre-bagged recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass, and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pickup with no on-premises sorting. The center must be maintained in a safe, clean, neat, and sanitary fashion and must meet the approval of the applicable Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, provided: 
a.  Such location shall be visually screened and maintained. 
b.  Such location shall be within the building setbacks unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Division, of the Board of Commissioners' of Paulding County, Georgia, due to topography, safety, internal traffic flow, site distance, or for other site-related circumstances not created by the property owner. 
(62)  Development Regulations: Refers to the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia which are incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(63)  Drive-in establishment: An establishment which is designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while in their automobiles parked upon the premises. 
(64)  Dwelling: A building designed, arranged, or used for permanent living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit or family. 
(65)  Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity, and recorded in the offices of the Clerk of Superior Court, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(66)  Exotic and/or Wild Animals: Any monkey or other non-human primate, such as a raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, rodent, wolf-hybrids, and reptiles, including, but not limited to crocodiles, alligators, snakes, caiman, and gavials, and any other animal so designated by the Animal Control Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(67)  Extended Stay Hotel/Motel: Any hotel or motel which more than ten percent (10%) of the units include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities within the suite. For the purpose of this Ordinance, kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are defined as a kitchen sink, a stove/cook top, and/or microwave, and a refrigerator. 
(68)  Family: An individual; or two or more persons related by blood, legal adoption or marriage within the third degree of consanguinity or within the second degree of affinity, and no more than two other persons who are not related within the third degree of consanguinity or within the second degree of affinity. The degree of consanguinity or affinity is computed by the civil law method. An individual's relatives within the third degree of consanguinity are the individual's parent or child (relatives in the first degree); brother, sister, grandparent or grandchild (relatives in the second degree); and great-grandparent, great-grandchild, aunt who is a sister of a parent of the individual, uncle who is a brother of a parent of the individual, nephew who is a child of a brother or sister of the individual, or niece who is a child of a brother or sister of the individual (relatives in the third degree). Two individuals are related to each other by affinity if they are married to each other as defined by O.C.G.A. § 19-3-3.1 or the spouse of one of the individuals is related by consanguinity to the other individual. A husband and wife are related to each other in the first degree by affinity. For other relationships by affinity, the degree of relationship is the same as the degree of the underlying relationship by consanguinity. 
(69)  Family care home: A home with support personnel that provide room and board, personal care and rehabilitation services in a family environment for up to nine (9) resident handicapped persons who because of a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, desire a substitute home; provided that persons with any of the following categories shall not be eligible for admission to a family care home: (a) mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others; (b) persons who are not handicapped persons, excluding supervisory personnel for the handicapped. As used herein, the term "handicapped" shall mean having: (a) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; (b) a record of having such an impairment; or (c) being regarded as having such an impairment. 
Facilities of this nature must meet applicable United States of America Federal, State of Georgia, Board of Commissioners' of Paulding County, Georgia, and/or Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia licensing and inspection requirements, including State Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia approval. 
(70)  Family personal care home: A home for adults and support personnel in a family type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two through nine persons, subject to licensing by the Georgia Department of Human Resources as well as applicable Paulding County, Georgia, and City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including State Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia approval. 
(71)  Federal: The Government of the United States of America 
(72)  Floor area (space), gross: The gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building, exclusive of garages, basements, open porches, and equipment and service areas measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a building. 
(73)  Floor area (space), net: The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. 
(74)  Floor Area Ratio: The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
(75)  Fraternity or sorority house: A dwelling maintained exclusively for members of a social fraternity or sorority affiliated with an academic or professional college or university, or other recognized institution of higher learning. 
(76)  Frontage, lot: The distance for which the front property line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
(77)  Garage: A structure or any portion thereof used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of one or more automobiles. 
(78)  Garage, repair: See Automotive repair. 
(79)  Golf course: A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards and that may include a clubhouse and shelter. 
(80)  Golf driving range: A tract of land dedicated to driving of golf balls off tees into a designated landing area. 
(81)  Governing Authority: The Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(82)  Grade: An average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure. 
(83)  Group home: A dwelling shared by nine (9) or less persons, excluding resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education/training, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential, subject to applicable State, Federal, and/or County incensing and inspection requirements, including State Fire Marshal and/or County Fire Department approval. Congregate Group Home: same as above but consists of more than nine (9) persons. 
(84)  Group personal care home: A home for adult persons in a residence or other type building(s), non-institutional in character, which offers care to ten (10) through sixteen (16) persons, subject to applicable United States of America Federal, State of Georgia, or Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(85)  Guest house: Guest houses are accessory buildings limited to one (1) such structure per lot and shall not include manufactured, mobile or modular structures. The minimum lot size is two (2) acres and shall be limited to the total area of all structures (existing and proposed) to be not more than twenty (20) percent of the total lot area. The guest house requires a Special Use Permit and is subject to the following at minimum: 
a.  An approved Special Use Permit issued by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and any stipulations imposed must be observed. 
b.  A minimum heated floor area of 800 square feet. 
c.  Septic system approval by State Environmental Health; 
d.  It shall be used by a bona fide non-paying guest or relative of the occupants of the principal residence, and shall not be rented or leased. 
e.  It shall not be sold as a separate unit from the principal residence. 
f.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance. 
g.  All applicable permits shall be obtained. 
(86)  Handicapped: With respect to a person, means having: 
a.  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; 
b.  A record of having such an impairment; or 
c.  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
(87)  Heavy industry: Industrial uses that meet the standards and or requirements established in this Ordinance. 
(88)  Heavy manufacturing establishment: Manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with anti-pollution standards established by the Federal, State, and/or County as applicable. 
(89)  HOA: Homeowners' Association. 
(90)  Home occupation: See home office, residential business, or rural business. 
a.  Home office: An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the occupant thereof and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes subject to the following standards: 
i.  No more than one room of the dwelling may be used for the home office. The home office shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling. 
ii.  The appearance of the dwelling shall not be altered or the occupation within the residence shall not be conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or the emission of sounds, vibrations, or other conditions that carry beyond the premises. 
iii.  The use shall not be visibly evident from outside the dwelling. 
iv.  The use shall not generate nuisances such as on-street parking, electrical interference, hazards, noise, or other nuisances. 
v.  Traffic generation for the dwelling with a home office shall not exceed that normally generated without a home office. 
vi.  The use shall not include any business which involves the sale, manufacture, or repair of merchandise on the premises or the storage of inventory, raw materials, or other materials to be used in the business. This does not apply to a mail order type business which has no on-site customers. 
vii.  The use shall include no more than two (2) clients per hour frequenting the services of the home office; however, during peak seasons (for example Certified Public Accounts), up to eight (8) clients per hour are permitted. 
viii.  The use shall not involve any outside operations or outside storage or display of products or materials. 
ix.  Only residents of the dwelling may be employed in the home office, except one incidental employee other than a resident of the dwelling is permitted. 
x.  One business vehicle is permitted. The vehicle shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck, or van, and is limited in size to one-ton carrying capacity. No other larger business vehicles or equipment are permitted (such as tractor trailers, semi-trucks, or heavy equipment). 
xi.  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be limited to vehicles having no more than two axles and shall be restricted to no more than two pickups or deliveries per day. 
b.  Residential Business: An occupation or business which is conducted entirely within a dwelling, or customary accessory building, is carried on by the occupant(s) of the dwelling, is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes, and which can only be conducted subject to approval of a Land Use Permit by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Residential businesses are subject to the following standards: 
i.  The residential business shall not include the repair and/or maintenance of motor vehicles, large scale manufacturing, or any use which will create noise, noxious odors, or any hazard that may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of the neighborhood. 
ii.  If the residential business involves group instruction or group assembly on the premises, the proposed size of group(s) shall be specified at the time of application for Land Use Permit. 
iii.  The occupation or profession must be conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory structure. 
iv.  The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner at the time of the application, and, if approved, the residential business shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business, and has a current business license. 
v.  The residential business shall be limited to no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the gross floor area of the dwelling. The proposed size of the residential business shall be specified at the time of application for Land Use Permit. 
vi.  Any additions or alterations to the dwelling which will be used for the residential business must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential and agricultural development. 
vii.  Only two (2) employees in excess of family members who are residing on the premises shall be permitted. For uses where no customers or clients are coming to the site, the number of employees permitted at any one time may be increased to three (3). 
viii.  Parking for customers/clients must be provided in accordance with this Ordinance, location of the parking to be specified in the Land Use Permit Application. 
ix.  Reserved. 
x.  No outside storage or display shall be allowed other than as specified herein. 
xi.  Days and operation requiring access by the public, customers, vendors, and/or clients shall be Monday through Saturday, daylight hours only. 
xii.  No more than one residential business or rural business is allowed per residence. 
xiii.  'One commercial vehicle is permitted to be parked in the approved parking area. The commercial vehicle is limited to a passenger car, a van, or a light truck (up to one ton), or a personal business vehicle up to 1½ tons. 
xiv.  Any utility trailer or other accessory equipment needed for the orderly operation of the business must be specifically requested and approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The request must include the proposed use and size of the trailer or accessory equipment. 
xv.  Pickups from and deliveries to the site in regard to the business shall be restricted to vehicles having no more than two (2) axles and shall be restricted to no more than two (2) pickups or deliveries per day. The pickups and deliveries are restricted to daylight hours only and shall not restrict traffic circulation. 
xvi.  There shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling stocks of merchandise, supplies, or products, provided however that incidental retail sales may be made in connection with the permitted residential business. Also permitted is the sale of articles which have been produced or assembled on the premises, and the sale of items that are primarily shipped directly to the ultimate purchaser, provided that no retail inventory is maintained on the premises. 
c.  Rural business: An occupation or business which is conducted within a dwelling, an accessory structure, or outside, and which is carried on by a resident of the property, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for the residential dwelling purposes, and which can only be conducted subject to approval of a Land Use Permit by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Rural businesses may be less restrictive than a residential business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees, and types of businesses. Rural businesses are subject to the following standards: 
i.  The minimum acreage requirement is three (3) acres. 
ii.  The applicant must state what the proposed business will be and must submit a site plan/floor plan showing the area to be involved in the business as part of the Land Use Permit application. 
iii.  The dwelling must be the bona fide residence of the principal practitioner at the time of the application, and, if approved, the rural business shall be valid only as long as the original principal practitioner resides in the dwelling, is conducting the business, and has a current business license. 
iv.  The business may include small repair shops for appliances, machinery, farm equipment, or automobiles with the following limitations: (1) they shall not create noise, noxious odors, or any hazard which would adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of the adjoining property owners or the neighborhood in general; (2) they shall operate during the daylight hours only; (3) outdoor storage of inoperable machinery, equipment, or vehicles is prohibited; (4) no more than two vehicles shall actually be serviced, actively worked on, or repaired at any one time; (5) all spare parts (new or used) shall be stored within a structure, and the storage space shall be included in the total space allocated for the rural business; and (6) all work shall be done within a fully enclosed building. 
v.  The business is limited to no more than one-thousand (1,000) square feet if in an accessory structure, and one-thousand (1,000) square feet of land if outside a structure. Outside operations or outside storage or display must be specified in the Land Use Permit application and shall be maintained as specified therein. If the rural business is to be in the residence, no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the gross floor area may be used for the business. The proposed size of the business shall be specified at the time of application. 
vi.  Any additions or alterations to the residence which will be used for the rural business must be of an architectural style in keeping with the surrounding residential and agricultural development. Any structure built to house the rural business must be located to the side or rear of the residence, or if the structure would be in front of the residence, it must be at least one hundred (100) feet from the front property line in addition to meeting the applicable side and rear setbacks. The structure must be readily and easily usable for customary agriculture and residential uses. 
vii.  Any outside area other than parking in which the business is conducted shall be enclosed in a manner that the business is not visible from the surrounding property by providing a buffer and/or fence (see buffer section). No equipment which would not ordinarily be found in agricultural or residential use may be used in the rural business. 
viii.  Only two employees in excess of family members who are residing on the premises shall be permitted. For uses where no customers or clients are coming to the site, the number of employees permitted at any one time may be increased to three. 
ix.  Parking for customers/clients must be provided in accordance with this Ordinance with location specified in the Land Use Permit application. 
x.  Reserved. 
xi.  Days and operation requiring access by the public, customers, vendors, and/or clients shall be Monday through Saturday, daylight hours only. 
xii.  No more than one residential business or rural business is allowed. 
xiii.  The Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may place any reasonable stipulations on the application deemed necessary to insure the orderly operation of the proposed business and its compatibility with the surrounding properties. 
(91)  Homeowners' Association: The organizational body of homeowners of a subdivision that governs the by-laws and covenants of the subdivision, and has lien authority that allows for the collection of dues and fines. 
(92)  Hospital: An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences, subject to applicable State of Georgia, United States of America Federal, or Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(93)  Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for at least fifteen (15) transient guests, and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours, and may include additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreation facilities. The units which may include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are limited to ten percent (10%). For the purpose of this Ordinance, kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are defined as a kitchen sink, a stove/cook top, and/or microwave, and a refrigerator. 
(94)  Junk vehicle: Any vehicle which is designed to move or draw any person or property which cannot be moved by its own power and which does not have a current registration or licensure. 
(95)  Junk yard: Any such use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, junk vehicles, trucks, or other vehicles; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap metal, commercial/residential appliances, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures and used brick, wood, or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, addition to, or accessory to, other uses of the premises. 
(96)  Kennel: Any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling animals. 
(97)  Landfill: A disposal site licensed by applicable State, Federal, and/or local government employing an engineering method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of the operating day. 
(98)  Land Use Permit: An official authorization for use of land not to exceed two (2) years which has been granted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in accord with this Ordinance. 
(99)  Light automotive repair establishment: An indoor repair establishment (no outside storage) for performing light auto and small truck repair (under one (1) ton) such as brakes, oil changes, lubrication, transmission, belts, hoses, inspections, and the like. 
(100)  Light manufacturing establishment: An establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed herein, shall not be permitted. This use shall also allow incidental on-site sale of manufactured materials only. 
(101)  Live entertainment: Music, comedy, readings, dancing, acting or other entertainment, excluding adult entertainment, performed on the site. This classification includes dancing by patrons to live or recorded music. 
(102)  Livestock: Cows, pigs, non-domestic animals (excluding exotic and/or wild animals), poultry, and species of the aviary family which are, or may be, raised for the purpose of providing leisure, food, transportation, or being resold or bred (excluding only dogs, cats, rabbits, fish, pet mice, hamsters, gerbils, parrots and parakeets). 
(103)  Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. A parcel of land, whether or not platted, in single ownership, and not divided by a street. 
(104)  Lot, corner: A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. When the frontage of one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. The side yard setback for a corner lot shall be twenty-five (25) feet in all zoning districts except where otherwise noted herein. 
(105)  Lot, depth of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
(106)  Lot, double frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2) streets. 
(107)  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Paulding County; or a parcel of land, the deed and/or plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Paulding County prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(108)  Lot, width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
(109)  Manufactured home park: A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes and/or mobile homes for non-transient use in accordance with requirements of this Ordinance. 
(110)  Motel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided for transient guests and offered to the motoring public for compensation in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made primarily direct from an exterior walkway rather than from an inside lobby. Only ten percent (10%) of the units may include kitchenettes or kitchen facilities. For the purpose of this Ordinance, kitchenettes or kitchen facilities are defined as a kitchen sink, a stove/cook top and/or microwave, and a refrigerator. 
(111)  Neighborhood retail uses: Commonly found low scale and low intensity retail uses (square footages not to exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet unless noted below) that offer basic services and frequently purchased goods to the immediate surrounding residential areas such as but not limited to: antique shop, bakery, beverage shop, delicatessen, barber shop, beauty shop, hair salon, similar personal service establishments, bookstore (but not including adult bookstore), stationery store, bridal shop, clothing store, shoe repair, shoe store, tailor shop, specialty shop, camera shop, music store, china and pottery store, gift shop, dance studio, florist, hardware store (gross floor area not to exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet total, jewelry store, meat market/butcher shop, novelty shop, variety store, toy store, paint store, pet grooming shop, pharmacy/drug store, sporting goods store, supermarket or grocery (gross floor area not to exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet), and video store. 
(112)  Non-automotive repair uses: Commonly found low intensity repair shops such as, but not limited to, jewelry, camera, home appliance, televisions, and video cassette recorders. 
(113)  Non-conforming lot: A lot (which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the zoning ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
(114)  Non-conforming structure or building: A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the zoning ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
(115)  Non-conforming use: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
(116)  Non-profit riding stable: A building for the shelter and feeding of domestic animals, especially horses. 
(117)  Nursing home/rest home: A home for aged or ill persons in which three (3) or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment, subject to applicable United States of America Federal Government, State of Georgia, and Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements including the Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(118)  Office service and supply establishments: Wholesale and retail commercial establishments that sell, service and supply small office equipment and supplies such as, but not limited to, stores that offer sales of copiers, facsimile machines, typewriters, ribbons, transcribers, dictation equipment, tape, staplers, and other general office equipment. 
(119)  Open space: An area that is not used for or occupied by a driveway, an off-street parking area, a loading space, a yard, a refuse storage space, or a building. 
(120)  Open Space Residential Development: Promotes development strategies for large tracts of land that can help communities preserve open space and natural areas in residential housing developments. 
(121)  Operations manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia: Such other person, other than the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia, who is appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia as the City Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and may be removed at any time with or without cause. The appointment of the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia to perform any duties, requirements or actions pursuant to this Ordinance which may be performed by the City Manger or the Temporary City Manager, is specifically required in the event that the City Operations Manager is to perform such duties, requirements or actions pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(122)  Ordinance: This Zoning Ordinance and all amendments thereto including the official zoning maps of the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and the official Land Use Map of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(123)  Other consumer goods and services: Businesses which cater to consumers such as awning shops and sales, burglar alarm systems, clothing (second-hand), exhibition house, furniture, home furnishings, equipment, and appliances (second-hand), glass, mirror, lawn mower and small motor, trading stamp redemption center, and the like. 
(124)  Other places of worship: Places such as monasteries, convents, novitiates, parish houses, parsonages, rectories, manse. 
(125)  Other service establishments Businesses or locations catering to specialty services such as auction house or store, cabinet maker, caterer, delivery and express service, driving school (private), fur repair and storage, gunsmith shop, locksmith shop, safe and vault repair, scientific instrument repair, taxidermist, tool sharpener, and the like. 
(126)  Park: Any lands or facilities owned, operated, controlled or managed by any county, city (municipality), state, or federal government or any governmental entity in and upon which recreational activities or places are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
(127)  Parking for vehicles: A location for on-site parking of automobiles, trucks, and recreational vehicles (with a manufacturer's towing and/or carrying capacity rating of less than one and one-half (1½) tons). This restriction shall not apply to vehicles parked on church property which are operated exclusively for church use. 
(128)  Parking space: An area which has for its exclusive purpose the parking of a vehicle. 
(129)  Personal property sales: Sales of personal property such as estate sales, yard sales, bakery sales, garage sales, bazaars, and the like; three (3) weekends per calendar year, not to exceed three (3) days per sale. 
(130)  Planned development: An area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed, and maintained according to plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
(131)  Planning Commission: The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(132)  Planned Residential Development (PRD) : A residential area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed, and maintained according to a plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
(133)  Plat: A map, plan, or layout, to scale of a county, city (municipality), town, lot, section, subdivision or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties, and prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(134)  Principal use: The primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
(135)  Public Works Development Review Committee: The Public Works Development Review Committee, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(136)  Rear of the principal building: Shall be that point where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings or annexes which are not parallel to the main portion of the building. 
(137)  Recreational Building: Recreational buildings are accessory buildings limited to one (1) such structure per lot and shall not include manufactured, mobile or modular structures. The minimum lot size is ten (10) acres and shall be limited to the total area of all structures (existing and proposed) to be not more than twenty (20) percent of the total lot area. The recreational building requires a Special Use Permit and is subject to the following at minimum: 
a.  An approved Special Use Permit issued by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and any stipulations imposed must be observed. 
b.  A minimum heated floor area of 1100 square feet. 
c.  Septic system approval by State Environmental Health; 
d.  It shall be used by a bona fide non-paying guest or relative of the occupants of the principal residence, and shall not be rented or leased. 
e.  It shall not be sold as a separate unit from the principal residence. 
f.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance. 
g.  All applicable permits shall be obtained. 
(138)  Recycling center: A center or location approved by the local government designed for sorting or collection or recyclables from designated recycling collection locations and other private entity sources. 
(139)  Regional shopping mall: A group of commercial enterprises offering a range of commercial goods and services in an aggregate of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet or more of net floor area which: 
a.  Are designed as a single commercial group; whether or not located on the same lot; 
b.  Are under one common ownership or management, or having one common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds; 
c.  Are connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural members to form one continuous structure; 
d.  Share a common parking area; and 
e.  Otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
(140)  Religious assembly: Religious services conducted on a site that is not permanently occupied by a religious assembly use, for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. 
(141)  Residence: A house, apartment, manufactured home, boarding or rooming house, duplex, or other multi-family housing for human dwelling. 
(142)  Rest home: See nursing home. 
(143)  Retail business: A business consisting primarily of buying merchandise or articles in gross and selling to general consumers in small quantities or broken lots or parcels and not in bulk and not for resale. 
(144)  Retail package liquor store: A retail business establishment owned by an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity: 
a.  Primarily engaged in the retail sale of distilled spirit, malt beverages, and wine in unbroken packages, not for consumption on the premises; and 
b.  That derives from such retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at least seventy-five percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of a combination of distilled spirits, malt beverage, and wine. (See also Article X, Section B requiring special use permit). 
(145)  Retail sales, outdoor: Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a licensed, established retail business which has a direct relationship to existing businesses. 
(146)  Retirement community: A development which may be in any housing form, including detached and attached dwelling units, apartments, and residences, offering private and semiprivate rooms. 
(147)  Right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
(148)  Rooming house: A building where housing accommodations are provided for compensation to three (3) or more, but not exceeding fifteen (15) persons, subject to applicable approval by the State Fire Marshall or County Fire Department. A building which has accommodations for more than fifteen (15) persons shall be defined as a hotel under the terms of this ordinance. 
(149)  School: Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
(150)  Self-service storage facility (mini-warehouse) : A structure containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time. 
(151)  Shelter, homeless: Charitable, non-profit, short-term housing and/or room and board accommodations for poor, transient, or needy individual(s) which must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Adequate showers and restroom facilities must be provided at the location to meet the needs of the overnight guests; 
b.  Beds must be provided for all overnight guests excluding staff and volunteer workers; 
c.  No shelter shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet to the nearest single-family residence; 
d.  Guests of the shelter shall be required to leave the shelter premises no later than 7:00 a.m.; 
e.  All premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary fashion; subject to approval by the State Fire Marshal and/or Paulding County Fire Department as applicable. 
While not specifically a permitted use under all districts, a shelter may be located in a church facility which meets the above minimum standards. 
(152)  Sign, business: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(153)  Sign, outdoor advertising: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(154)  International Codes: Minimum standards as set by the International Code Council, as may be amended from time to time, pertaining to building, fire prevention, gas, mechanical and plumbing. 
(155)  Special Use Permit: A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in accord with provisions of this Ordinance. 
(156)  Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, road, boulevard, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way. For the purpose of this Ordinance, "streets" are divided into the following categories: 
a.  Alley—A minor way, public or private, used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street; 
b.  Cul-de-sac—A minor street having one end open to traffic and the other end terminated with a paved turn-around; 
c.  Dead end—A stub street in a subdivision which will at a later time be continued into another portion of the subdivision; 
d.  Major or arterial streets—Those streets designed to serve moderately fast and voluminous traffic through and within the county with a minimum of traffic control devices; 
e.  Minor or local streets—A street used primarily for access to adjacent and abutting properties; 
f.  Secondary or collector streets—Those streets designed to collect traffic to minor or local streets and distribute it to major or arterial streets. 
(157)  Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story if its ceiling is over six (6) feet above the average level of the finished ground surface adjoining the exterior walls of such story, or if it is used for business or dwelling purposes. 
(158)  Street fairs: Temporary provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures. 
(159)  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
(160)  Structural alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any structural change in the roof, or dimension of the rooms therein. 
(161)  Subdivision: A tract of land divided into more than two (2) lots and as set forth in the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, (refer to the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia which are incorporated herein by reference thereto). 
(162)  Subdivision Development Regulations: Refers to the Subdivision Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia which are incorporated herein by reference thereto. 
(163)  Temporary impound lot: An establishment used for the short-term storage of damaged or confiscated vehicles. 
(164)  Temporary uses: Specialized and intermittent uses of property such as animal shows, Christmas tree sales, circuses and carnivals, commercial filming limited, live entertainment, personal property sales, religious assemblies, retail sales outdoor, street fairs, and swap meets (non-recurring) not to exceed thirty (30) days or the time period set forth in these definitions, whichever is lesser. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all such uses. 
(165)  Tent: A temporary or permanent structure having a roof and/or walls of fabric. 
(166)  Townhouse: An attached house in a row or group, each house separated from adjoining houses in the same row or group by architectural style, changing of facade, offsets, and by fire walls or fire separations. 
(167)  Travel trailer/recreational vehicle: A portable structure whether self-propelled or pulled by a power unit, designed for temporary occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation uses. 
(168)  Use, accessory: See accessory use. 
(169)  Variance: A modification of the literal provisions of this ordinance, when strict enforcement of said provisions would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought, which the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may grant, after conducting a zoning appeals hearing, contingent on receiving a recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(170)  Veterinary clinic/hospital: A place where animals are given medical care by a licensed veterinarian and the boarding of animals is indoors and limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital or clinic use. 
(171)  Veterinary care and associated boarding facility: A place where animals are given medical care by a licensed veterinarian and may also include breeding and/or boarding of animals and kennel facilities as a function of the business provided no part of any outside structure, pen, run, enclosure, or fence for animals is located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line. 
(172)  Wholesale business: A business primarily engaged in the selling of goods or articles in gross to retailers or jobbers for resale and not to the ultimate consumer. 
(173)  Yard: An open space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(174)  Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(175)  Yard, rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
(176)  Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
(177)  Zoning Administrator: The Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, §§ 4, 5, 7-7-2015) 
ARTICLE IV. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. A. - Division into districts. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Hiram, Georgia, is divided into the following zoning districts designated as follows: 

 
Sec. B. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of each district are as shown on a map (or series of maps) which is entitled "Hiram Zoning Map, Hiram, Georgia" and certified by the Clerk of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Said map(s) and all explanatory matter thereon are hereby made a part of and incorporated into this ordinance. Said map(s) shall be retained in the office of the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. C. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Hiram, Georgia, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line, or the center line of a city street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a city street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the city street, county road, state highway, interstate highway, or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than fifty feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
(4)  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
Sec. D. - Establishment and adoption of comprehensive future land use map. 
By this Section, the comprehensive future land use map adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, on October 30, 2007, is established as a guide for the Administrative Offices of the government of the City of Hiram, Georgia, concerning proposed land uses, under which the incorporated areas of the City of Hiram, Georgia, are divided into the following land use categories: 
(1)  Commercial. 
(2)  Green Space. 
(3)  Industrial. 
(4)  High Density Residential 5 Units Per Acre Maximum. 
(5)  Medium Density Residential 3 Units Per Acre Maximum. 
(6)  Low Density Residential 2 Units Per Acre Maximum. 
Sec. E. - Comprehensive future land use map distinguished from zoning. 
The comprehensive future land use map is a guide and is not binding; it does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the incorporated limits of the City of Hiram, Georgia, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning map, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. A. - Use. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, subdivided, moved, altered, added to, or enlarged for any purpose or in any manner other than is set forth in this ordinance or in amendments to this ordinance. 
Sec. B. - Height. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, to exceed in height the limit established in this ordinance or amendments to this ordinance. 
Sec. C. - Only one principal building. 
Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings may be erected on any one (1) lot within agricultural, single-family residential, and manufactured housing subdivisions, or on lots containing a single-family residential use. In non single-family residential districts, any one (1) lot may contain more than one primary structure provided: (a) Not more than one single-family residential structure is located on any one lot; multi-family uses may be located on the same lot subject to area, yard, setback, and zoning requirements; (b) a primary residential use cannot be combined or conducted on the same lot with a primary office, institutional, commercial, or industrial use except as hereinafter provided; and (c) parking, setbacks, loading, and unloading space, and other applicable development standards must be met for each structure or use as if it were on a separate lot. 
Sec. D. - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per family, or other requirements of this Ordinance, are not maintained unless approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, after review and recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public purposes. 
Sec. E. - Lot abutting street. 
No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which does not abut for a minimum of thirty (30) feet on a publicly dedicated, publicly approved, or publicly maintained street, or on a dedicated easement (which has been recorded in the Clerk of Superior Court, of Paulding County, Georgia) connecting with a public way which guarantees ingress and egress for perpetuity (also subject to requirements of the Subdivision Regulation Ordinance). 
Sec. F. - Corner lot. 
A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection. When the frontage of one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. The side yard setback for a corner lot adjacent to a local street shall be twenty-five (25) feet in all zoning districts except where otherwise noted herein. 
Sec. G. - Double frontage lots. 
If a building or accessory building is constructed or a use of a lot occurs on a lot having frontage on two (2) roads, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard setback requirements in which the lot is located. 
Sec. H. - Unobstructed yard. 
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, except for the ordinary projection of a cornice, eave, belt cornice, sill, canopy or other similar architectural feature projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into said yard. 
Sec. I. - Required yard. 
No yard provided for about a building for the purposes of complying with the provisions of this ordinance or amendments thereto shall be considered as providing a yard for any other building, and no yard on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard for a building on any other lot. 
Sec. J. - Inspection of required buffers. 
In the event a screen, wall, fence, planted dividing strip, or any other type of buffer is required by this Ordinance for any use, such screen, wall, etc., will be subjected to periodic inspections by the City Code Enforcement Division and/or the Operations Manager's Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to determine that such required walls, fences, etc., are being properly maintained. Failure to maintain such required walls, fences, etc. to an acceptable standard may be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
Sec. K. - General storage. 
No outside storage of goods or materials shall be allowed except as hereinafter provided. 
ARTICLE Va. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
Introductory—All mobile homes, manufactured homes, and trailer homes, as defined in this ordinance, and as identified in this Article are subject to the regulations, requirements, and restrictions of this Article. 

Sec. A. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official means the duly appointed building inspector for the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, or such inspector's authorized representative. 
Component means any assembly, subassembly, or combination of parts for use as a part of a building, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
Health officer means the legally designated health authority of Paulding County, Georgia, or such authority's authorized agent. 
Industrialized building means any structure, or component thereof which is wholly, or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation, or assembly and installation on a building site; which has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts, or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage, or destruction thereof; and which bears an insignia of the Department of Community Affairs, of the State of Georgia, indicating state approval pursuant to the acts of the General Assembly, of the State of Georgia. 
Installation means the assembly of an industrialized building onsite and the process of affixing the industrialized building, component, or system to land, a foundation, footings, or an existing building. 
Manufacture means the process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming, or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, or semi-finished materials. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with, or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Manufactured home, class I, means a manufactured home intended for use as a single-family dwelling unit that bears an insignia indicating compliance with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), or one, if constructed prior to applicability of such insignia requirements, was constructed in conformity with the State of Georgia standards in effect on the date of manufacture, and has a width of 16 feet or less. 
Manufactured home, class II, means a manufactured home intended for use as a single-family dwelling unit that meets the requirements of a manufactured home, class I, and has a minimum width in excess of 16 feet. 
Manufactured home park means a lot or parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes, and/or mobile homes for non-transient use. 
Manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a manufactured home park designated for the accommodation of not more than one manufactured home of single-family occupancy. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with, or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular home means a factory-manufactured single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of "industrialized building." 
Service buildings means a building housing facilities, such as: recreational, maintenance, laundry, and office structures necessary to the successful development and management of a manufactured home park. 
Single-family dwelling unit means a structure designed, arranged, and used for occupancy by one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit or family. 
Site means the entire tract, subdivision, or parcel of land on which the industrialized building, manufactured home, or mobile home is installed. 
System means structural, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, or fire safety elements, materials, or components used separately, or combined for use in a building. 
Travel trailer means a mobile unit designed for camping, recreational travel, or vacation use which is equipped with a chassis and provides partial housekeeping facilities. 
Sec. B. - Zoning requirements. 
1.  Manufactured homes, class I, and mobile homes. 
(A)  Zoning and permits. No manufactured home, class I, nor any mobile home, nor any other such structure which does not meet the definition of manufactured home, class II shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the City of Hiram, Georgia, unless the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The proposed placement of such structure must be in an area zoned R-6 (Manufactured Home Park District), in an existing mobile home park, or on a site which qualifies under one or more permitted exceptions as described herein below, except that such structure may not be placed on any site which is a part of a properly platted and approved subdivision, or planned residential district, as defined elsewhere in this Code (provided that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity); 
(2)  An application shall be filed with Paulding County, Georgia, through the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Department, for a Special Use Permit from the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to allow such installation, use and occupancy for single-family purposes on any site zoned for single-family use, and permits must be obtained prior to transportation to such site. Such application shall be on forms specified by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary for evaluation of the application; 
(3)  The following, as a minimum, shall be filed with the special use permit application: 
(a)  Complete set of design plans which should also include a drawing depicting each elevation of the exterior appearance of the unit and which depict the unit size to be not less than 1,100 square feet of heated floor space. 
(b)  Plat of the proposed site prepared by a registered surveyor showing, at a minimum, the exterior boundaries of the site, proposed location of the unit upon the site, and side, front, and rear setbacks of the unit as proposed to be located, as measured from the exterior boundaries of the lot. 
(c)  An initial fee of $125.00 on file in the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and with the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(d)  A certificate from an inspector selected, or approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, certifying that the unit was manufactured in accordance with the building codes in effect for the City of Hiram, Georgia, at the time of filing the application for a permit (for example, building, heating and air-conditioning, plumbing, electrical, or other codes). 
(4)  The Special Use Permit herein required shall be in addition to all other permits, or requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(5)  No action on a request for a Special Use Permit shall be considered by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, until: 
(a)  A sign is posted on the proposed site for a period of not less than 15 days stating the requested action and the date, time, and place for the public hearing; and 
(b)  A hearing is conducted by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(6)  No such Special Use Permit shall be granted unless the unit, when completely installed as a single-family dwelling unit, will be compatible with the adjacent and surrounding area, especially in size, exterior appearance, front, rear, and side setbacks, and will have no adverse effect upon the value of adjacent property and the surrounding area, and will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(7)  No unit shall be installed upon any site unless and until any permit herein required is granted, and unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections required for on-site work. Such fees shall not exceed the amount charged for similar inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
(8)  In addition to obtaining the above permits, and prior to occupancy, every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, which is permanently enclosed, and shall have all wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
(9)  No unit shall be installed upon any lot or parcel of land which forms a part of a platted subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and recorded in the Office of the Clerk, of the Superior Court, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(B)  Permitted exceptions. 
(1)  Existing mobile homes and manufactured homes, Class I not in a mobile home park may remain on presently occupied lots provided that the area of the lot is a minimum of 20,000 square feet; with a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum front yard of 35 feet and side yards of 30 feet; and water and sewer services are provided and are in compliance with health department standards. The mobile home shall be placed on a masonry foundation and enclosed from the foundation to the mobile home floor by concrete block, or other ways approved by the Department of Community Development, Building Inspector, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(2)  Hardship applications will be considered when accompanied by a doctor's affidavit, given under oath and appropriately notarized, stating the applicant's physical condition and the need for living close to someone for the purpose of that person helping to care for the applicant. Applications must conform to the regulations applicable to filing for rezoning and must be accompanied by an application fee of $125.00, to be advertised for the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, meeting the following month. The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall consider the application, and shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, either that the application be approved, or denied. Recommendations regarding the application rest in the inherent discretion of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. Decisions regarding the grant, or denial of such application rest in the inherent discretion of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall first hold a public hearing, within the incorporated limits of the City of Hiram, Georgia, adhering to the format described in this zoning ordinance, regarding public hearings, prior to their consideration of the application. In considering such application, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may consider the following factors: the degree of the hardship experienced by the applicant; current zoning; location in the City of Hiram, Georgia, of the proposed site; other alternatives to placement of such structure; feasibility of installation of such structure on the proposed site; effect on aesthetics and market value of neighboring areas; the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Hiram, Georgia; and other factors deemed pertinent. 
(3)  Temporary permits may be granted by the Department of Community Development, Permits Division to an individual for the location of a single mobile home on a tract of land anywhere within the City of Hiram, Georgia, for the following purposes: 
(a)  A temporary dwelling or mobile home to be occupied, or otherwise used in conjunction with the construction of a permanent type building, or dwelling, and located on the same site. The maximum time that the temporary permit shall remain in effect in such case shall be one year, or until completion of construction, whichever is less. Before approval of any temporary permit, the applicant must have completely dug and poured the footings for the permanent dwelling. 
(b)  Entertainment activities such as fairs or carnivals. The maximum time that the temporary permit shall remain in effect in such cases shall be four weeks, or until the activity is finished, whichever is less. 
(c)  Bona fide recreation activities. The maximum time that a temporary permit shall remain in effect in such cases shall be specified in said permit, but shall not exceed six months. 
(d)  Religious activities. For facilities used for the gathering of individuals for religious worship, the maximum time that a temporary permit shall remain in effect in such cases shall be specified in said permit, but shall not exceed one year. 
(e)  An office, mobile unit, may be moved in by the developer for a 12-month period. 
(f)  Temporary permits are issued subject to the following conditions: 
(i)  The foundation of the mobile home identified in the temporary permit shall not be made permanent. 
(ii)  The regulations of the City of Hiram, Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and the health departments, of the State of Georgia, regarding sanitary facilities, water supply, and sewage disposal shall be met, provided that the water supply and sewage disposal systems of any other buildings existing on the site, or under construction in the site may be used. This sewage disposal system at a minimum shall consist of a septic tank and nitrification field where public sewerage is not available. 
(iii)  One extension of time on a temporary permit for construction of a dwelling shall be permitted for not longer than a period of six months. An extension is contingent upon a showing by the applicant that the following items must have been completed with the one year period. The house must be completely framed, the windows and doors set, the roof completed, and exterior walls completed. 
(iv)  The temporary permit fee shall be $200.00, provided that no such fee is required for a temporary permit for three weeks, or less. 
(v)  Time extensions of said permits may be granted in the inherent discretion of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(4)  Each temporary permit shall specify the purpose and the time period for which it is issued. A copy of each temporary permit shall be signed by the individual to whom it is issued and shall be retained in the files of the Department of Community Development, Permits Division. Public advertisement and a hearing before the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, not required for a temporary permit. 
(5)  Any existing valid permits for manufactured and mobile homes are not revoked, however, valid manufactured and mobile homes shall be maintained in place only in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Specifically, no existing manufactured or mobile home shall be replaced by another structure governed by this ordinance, nor shall any such existing structure be used other than as owner occupied. Any conforming owner-occupied single-wide mobile home may be replaced by another such conforming structure within 30 days of its removal, or destruction. 
(6)  Campers and travel trailers are not required to conform to this resolution unless used for living purposes. 
(7)  Collapsible camping trailers, when stored outside of a carport or a garage, shall be stored in their collapsed condition. 
(8)  All mobile homes occupied via a hardship, or other special permitting bases shall be reviewed every 12 months by the Department of Community Development, Marshall's Office Division, or by the Code Enforcement Division, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, Police Department, to determine if the hardship still exists. If it is determined that the hardship no longer exists, then the mobile home shall be: 
(a)  Placed in an approved zoning district, or other location where a permitted exception exists as set forth in this section; or 
(b)  Removed from the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(9)  No electrical power company shall hereafter connect electrical service to any mobile home site for human habitation, or for other purposes for using electricity unless the person requesting such electrical service shall present to the electrical company a permit and inspection report from the Department of Community Development, Permits Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, showing that the inspection and permit have been made within six months of the time the electrical service is requested. 
2.  Manufactured homes, class II. 
Zoning requirements. Manufactured homes which meet the requirements of manufactured homes, class II, shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts, except that such structure may not be placed on any site which is a part of a properly platted, and approved subdivision, or planned residential district, as defined elsewhere in this Code; provided that the following requirements are met: 
(A)  The structure has a minimum square footage as required by the zoning district in which the proposed site is located, but in no event shall said structure have less than 1,100 square feet of heated floor space. 
(B)  The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the Department of Community Development, Permits Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(C)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, hardy plank, metal, or vinyl lap, or other material of like appearance. 
(D)  The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation. 
(E)  Every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, all towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed, and the area beneath must be enclosed with materials manufactured for such purposes, including but not limited to brick, concrete, rock or other materials which have been approved by the Department of Community Development, Permits Division. 
(F)  At each exit door there must be a landing consisting of cement, concrete, brick, pressure-treated lumber, or other like material that complies with the State of Georgia, state minimum standard codes and having a minimum area of 36 inches by 36 inches. 
3.  Notification to purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of any class described in this section to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the applicable zoning requirements as set forth hereinabove, and this notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of any sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller for a minimum of three years from the date of sale and shall be produced for inspection by the Department of Community Development, Inspections Division, at any time during the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia, through any authorized agent appointed by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia, upon request by the agent for the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, for inspection. 
4.  Industrialized buildings. 
(A)  Permits required. No industrialized building shall be installed upon any site unless and until permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation, or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the Department of Community Development, Permits Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(B)  Permit fees. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the Department of Community Development, Permits Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections under/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
(C)  Insignia requirements. No industrialized building shall be installed or occupied in the City of Hiram, Georgia, unless it bears an insignia of the Department of Community Affairs, of the State of Georgia, indicating state approval pursuant to laws of the State of Georgia. 
(D)  Zoning. No industrialized building shall be erected upon any site in the City of Hiram, Georgia, nor used for any purpose, unless the site is properly zoned for the intended use or a Special Use Permit has been obtained for the intended use and unless all other requirements of zoning (setback requirement, building size, etc.) and other ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia, are met which are applicable to the zoning classification for the site or for the installation. 
(E)  Other ordinances. This ordinance does not eliminate the necessity of complying with any ordinance, rule, or regulation of the City of Hiram, Georgia, which relate to matters addressed, investigated, and approved by the State of Georgia through its Department of Community Affairs resulting in the issuance of its insignia. 
(F)  Notification by seller. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of any industrialized building to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of these requirements. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each at the time of completion of a sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained, and open for inspection the same as for a manufactured home, class I, above. 
5.  Violations. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be punishable as a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or loss of business license or both. In addition, any manufactured home, industrialized building, or mobile home erected, constructed, parked, occupied, or used in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall be termed a nuisance, upon the determination and adjudication that such is unlawful and a public nuisance by the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia or any other court having jurisdiction and venue to determine that such is unlawful and a public nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia, and the industrialized building, or manufactured home shall be instantly removed from the site. In addition, the terms of this ordinance may be enforced by the City of Hiram, Georgia, or its designee or the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. This right to injunctive relief is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any person, resident, property owner, or other enforcement of this ordinance or of such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City of Hiram, Georgia in pursuance of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE Vb. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS, ANTENNAE, AND TOWERS 

Sec. A. - Purposes. 
This ordinance is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Hiram, Georgia, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the City of Hiram, Georgia, so as to protect the health, safety, and integrity of residential neighborhoods, and to foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. This ordinance shall not prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services. This ordinance is intended to promote the City of Hiram, Georgia, as a proactive City in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this ordinance shall: 
1.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities within the City of Hiram, Georgia; 
2.  Protect the City of Hiram, Georgia's, built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
3.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
4.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennas; 
5.  Maximum use of any new and existing telecommunications towers through collocation so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the City of Hiram, Georgia; 
6.  Maximum and encourage use of alternate telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
7.  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications activities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
Sec. B. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
1.  Alternative tower structure: manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage, or conceal the presence of antennas, or towers. 
2.  Antenna: any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
3.  FAA: the Federal Aviation Administration. 
4.  FCC: the Federal Communications Commission. 
5.  Governing authority: the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
6.  Preexisting towers and antennas: the meaning set forth in article III, section A(4), of this ordinance. 
7.  Height: when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level at the base of the structure to the highest point on the tower, or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
8.  Tower: any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one, or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
Sec. C. - Applicability. 
1.  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this ordinance shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. 
2.  Public property. Antennas, or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, provided a license, or lease authorizing such antenna, or tower has been approved by the governing authority. 
3.  Amateur radio, receive-only antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned, and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator, or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
4.  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this ordinance, other than the requirements of article III, section B(4) and (5). Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this ordinance as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." 
Sec. D. - Standards applicable to all towers and antennas. 
No tower or antenna shall be located in the City of Hiram, Georgia, except as set forth in this ordinance. The following standards shall apply to all towers and antennas, unless the governing authority reduces the standards if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby: 
1.  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A difference [different] existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
2.  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the geographic area of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or within one-half mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower (pursuant to section C of this article). The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals, or Special Use Permits under this ordinance, or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within this the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however, that the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing, or warranting that such sites are available, or suitable. 
3.  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this paragraph shall govern the locations of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this ordinance; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby. The determination whether a proposed tower, or antenna meets these requirements shall be within the discretion of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. This list is not an exclusive list of the aesthetic issues the governing authority may consider; these are merely guidelines. The governing authority may consider any factor that serves the goals and purposes of this ordinance. 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA, or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
e.  In designing a tower facility, the aesthetics of the tower shall be considered and the least visually obtrusive design shall be implemented. 
4.  Federal requirements. All towers must meet, or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. 
5.  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. 
6.  [Location and development.] Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zoning district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
7.  [Vegetation and topography.] Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
8.  [Design of related structures.] At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
9.  [Number of towers per lot.] Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all set-back, design, and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
10.  [Maximum height.] The maximum height for all tower facilities in the City of Hiram, Georgia, unless otherwise exempt from these standards, as set forth in Article III herein, located within all agricultural, residential, and commercial zoning categories shall be 195 feet. The maximum height for all tower facilities in the City, unless exempt from these standards as set forth in Article III herein, located within all industrial zoning categories shall be 250 feet. 
11.  [Setback for towers.] Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any residential property line and all public rights-of-way, plus 100 feet. 
12.  [Setback for accessory facilities; towers in yards.] Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for front, side, and rear yards. In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard, or side yard in a residential district. 
13.  [Historic and scenic views; visual clutter.] Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing authority, or any State of Georgia, or federal law, or agency, or where they will create visual clutter. 
14.  [Fencing.] Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing installed along the perimeter of the compound, not less than six feet in height, and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
15.  [Landscaping.] The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers: 
a.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent properties. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten feet wide outside the required fence. 
b.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, as determined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager the landscaping requirement may be reduced, or waived altogether. 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may provide an adequate buffer at the discretion of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
16.  [Design for multiple users.] Any tower proposed at a height greater than 100 feet, up to 120 feet, shall be designed, and intended to accommodate at least three users. Furthermore, for every additional 20 feet of height, said tower shall be designed to accommodate an additional user. 
Sec. E. - Application procedures for all towers and antennas. 
The following must be provided when applying for a permit for a telecommunications facility: 
1.  Site plan, prepared and sealed by an appropriate licensing professional, to scale specifying the location of the telecommunications facilities, height of facilities, setbacks, transmission building, and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscape plan, and adjacent land uses. 
2.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, or scenic view corridors, as well as a phase I environmental study of the site completed by a qualified, independent engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
3.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise, or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
4.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
a.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number, and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility, and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris should a failure occur. 
5.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna, or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity, including, but not limited to, radio frequency (RF) propagation studies at heights requested at the discretion of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
6.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity, and that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of the proposed tower or antenna. 
7.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address, and page number, if applicable. 
8.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including: 
a.  A map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the applicant's network located within a five-mile radius of the site as well, as other approved sites, or telecommunications facilities located within a five-mile radius of the site outside the applicant's network; 
b.  A description and scaled map of the distance between existing or proposed telecommunications facility sites; and 
c.  A description of how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
9.  Provide information to justify why collocation on an existing tower or on multiple towers covering the area is not being proposed and demonstrate same with scaled maps and other data requested at the discretion of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
10.  If the proposed site is zoned residential, applicants must justify why alternative nonresidential sites have not been proposed. 
11.  Each applicant shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, to be upgraded, or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the City of Hiram, Georgia, and Paulding County, Georgia, and a map showing these sites. The list must include (1) street address, land lot, section, district, and parcel number; (2) zoning district; (3) type of building and number of stories; (4) the number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand-alone, rooftop, building facade, etc.), and location of the base transceiver station installations(s); (5) the height from ground to the top of the antenna installation; and (6) the radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and the effective radiated power. Furthermore, after a tower structure has been approved, the applicant must submit a permit renewal application, which reports the status on the use of said tower, annually to the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for administrative approval. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations, but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the land lots contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
12.  If requested by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager photo simulations depicting the design and type of tower proposed. 
13.  All signed leases, option agreements, or signed collocation agreements between the applicant and carriers with valid FCC licenses, to provide wireless services to locate antennas on the site. 
14.  The applicant shall provide any other information requested by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager in order to fully evaluate the potential impact of the proposed facility. 
Sec. F. - Permitted uses. 
1.  General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require administrative review or a Special Use Permit. Nevertheless, all uses shall comply with Article III of this ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances. 
2.  Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted: 
a.  In commercial zoning districts (B-1, B-2, or PSC), locating a tower up to a height of 50 feet (80 feet is designed and intended to accommodate at least two users), or an antenna, including the placement of additional buildings, or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna shall be allowed as a use by right; provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing residential property line and/or public right-of-way a distance equal to the height of the tower plus 100 feet. 
b.  In industrial zoning districts (I-1 or I-2), locating a tower up to a height of 80 feet (or 100 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users), or an antenna, including the placement of additional buildings, or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna, shall be allowed as a use by right, provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing residential property line, and/or public right-of-way a distance equal to the height of the tower [plus] 100 feet. 
c.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure) so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure. For antennas attached to the roof, or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structures requires a ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
d.  All specified permitted uses must meet minimum landscape requirements as set forth in Article III, section B(14), herein. 
Sec. G. - Administrative approvals. 
1.  General. The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager may administratively approve the uses listed in this article. Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, providing the information set forth in Article III of this ordinance. The applicant shall provide to the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager all information and supplementary materials requested by the perspective offices, in consideration of the requested administrative approval. 
If an administrative approval is denied by the Department of Community Development Director, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, the applicant may appeal said denial to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to be heard by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, at a properly advertised public meeting, after the appeal of the application for an administrative approval has been advertised, considered, and a recommendation on the appeal of the application for an administrative approval has been issued by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, a properly advertised public hearing shall be held in the City of Hiram, Georgia, for review and a final decision will be rendered by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
2.  Specific administratively approved uses. The following may be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after conducting an administrative review: 
a.  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower, so long as the addition or extension of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower and does not make the tower structure or facility taller than the height restrictions for tower facilities set forth herein in Article III, Section B, and further including the placement of additional buildings, or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided the requirements and intent of this ordinance are met. 
b.  In commercial zoning districts (B-1, B-2, or PSC), locating a tower up to a height of 100 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users, or an antenna, including the placement of additional buildings, or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna, provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing residential property line and/or public right-of-way a distance equal to the height of the tower plus 100 feet, and provided that the requirements and intent of this ordinance are met. 
c.  In industrial zoning districts (I-1 or I-2), locating a tower up to a height of 150 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users, or an antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna, provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing residential property line and/or public right-of-way a distance equal to the height of the tower plus 100 feet, and provided that the requirements and intent of this ordinance are met. 
d.  In commercial and industrial zoning districts (B-1, B-2, PSC, I-1, or I-2), locating an alternative design tower with antenna pursuant to the requirements set forth in this subsection below, including, but not limited to, structures such as manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures, that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and tower facilities. The following requirements shall apply to tower facilities, structures or antennas approved pursuant to this subsection: 
1)  The maximum height for an alternative structure, facility and/or antenna shall not exceed 65 feet, including antenna; and 
2)  The setbacks for said alternative design tower facility, structure and/or antenna shall be determined by the underlying zoning category of the subject tract in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia; and 
3)  All associated equipment for the tower facility, structure and/or antenna shall be vaulted and landscaped to shield the equipment from the view of the public; and 
4)  The structure, including the tower facility and antenna, shall blend with the surrounding environment and is subject to the review of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager in accordance with the intent of this ordinance. 
Sec. H. - Special use permits. 
1.  General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: 
a.  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use and [pursuant to] Article IV of this ordinance, or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to Article V of this ordinance, then a Special Use Permit shall be required for the construction of a tower, or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
b.  In granting a Special Use Permit, the governing authority may impose conditions to the extent the governing authority concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
c.  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
2.  Information required. Each applicant requesting a Special Use Permit under this ordinance shall comply with the requirements of Article III and other applicable provisions of this ordinance. In addition to the requirements of Article III, the site plan shall also include: 
a.  A scaled elevation view; and 
b.  Supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, and other information deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. 
3.  Factors considered in granting Special Use Permit. The governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a Special Use Permit, although the governing authority may waive, reduce, or increase the burden on the applicant of one, or more of these criteria, if the governing authority concludes that the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
h.  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, and alternative sites as discussed in Article III of this ordinance; and 
i.  Any other factors, limitations, or standards listed in Article III of this ordinance. 
Sec. I. - Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. 
No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, or structure, or multiple towers, or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located or approved within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meeting applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers or structures, or a combination of towers or structures, do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
5.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors, excluding solely economic feasibility as the determining factor that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
Sec. J. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
1.  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna, or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
2.  If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 4-1-28—41-2-17, remove such antenna, or tower at the owner's expense. 
3.  If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
4.  Failure to begin construction on a tower facility within 18 months of receipt of approval of a Special Use Permit, or administrative approval will result in the Special Use Permit, or administrative approval being deemed abandoned by the applicant and the approval will be voided. The initial twelve-month period for commencement of construction may be extended one time for a period of six months duration at the discretion of the Department of Community Development Director, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, or, if the administrative extension is denied, through an affirmative vote of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. K. - Written decisions. 
1.  Any decisions by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, denying a request to place, construct, or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
2.  Any decision by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, denying or approving a request to place, construct, or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
a.  At any time after a hearing on a Special Use Permit application under Article VI of this ordinance, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may instruct the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, in consultation with legal counsel, to determine whether substantial evidence contained in a written record exists to support either approval or denial of the Special Use Permit application. Having voted to so instruct the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall postpone its decision on the application until the specified date of a future regularly scheduled meeting of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
b.  In the intervening time between an instruction from the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, under paragraph [(2)] (a) of this subsection, the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall compile any additional evidence regarding the application for Special Use Permit that the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, deems necessary to constitute the substantial evidence contained in a written record necessary to support either approval or denial of the Special Use Permit application. 
c.  Ten days before the meeting of the Mayor and Council, of the city of Hiram, Georgia, on the date specified in paragraph [(2)] (a) of this subsection, the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall present any additional evidence compiled under paragraph [(2)] (b) of this subsection for the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia's, consideration, and shall make such evidence available to the applicant. At the meeting of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, on the date specified in paragraph [(2)] (a) of this subsection, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall render its decision to approve or deny the Special Use Permit application. At this meeting there will be no additional public comment or applicant presentation, regarding the Special Use Permit application, provided, however, that any affected party, including the applicant, may present additional written materials to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. L. - Penalties for violation. 
1.  Any person who erects, or attempts to erect a telecommunications facility covered by this ordinance without having first obtained the necessary Department of Community Development, Permits Division, Building Permit, use by right, Special Use Permit, or variance in the manner provided in this ordinance [shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance]. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia or a court of competent jurisdiction, of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
2.  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this ordinance, or without obtaining required permits, or if any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the City of Hiram, Georgia, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to correct, or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, or use continues, may be deemed a separate offense. 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. A. - Lots of record. 
(1)  Substandard size lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site provided the yard and other space requirements of the district may be reduced by the smallest amount that will permit reasonable use of the property as a building site. However, in no case shall the setbacks be reduced to less than one-half (½) of the least restrictive zoning district's minimum area and yard requirements set forth within this Ordinance unless approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, after review and recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(2)  Adjoining lots. If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this Ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width, and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. This does not apply to lots approved prior to the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Sec. B. - Maintenance of non-conforming buildings and structures. 
(1)  A non-conforming building or structure shall be maintained upon the following conditions and not otherwise: 
a.  No structural alterations except those required by law shall be made thereto. 
b.  No enlargement or additions shall be made thereto. 
c.  No repairs in excess of fifty percent (50%) of a building's or structure's valuation shall be made thereto, unless otherwise specified herein. 
d.  A non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy may be restored to the size, shape, and/or height of the structure as it existed immediately prior to the damage provided this can be determined or documented. 
(2)  Use of non-conforming building, structure or premises. 
a.  The non-conforming use of a non-conforming building or structure lawfully existing at the time this ordinance became effective may be extended throughout the building or structure provided no structural alterations except those required by law, or for general maintenance, are made therein and provided further than the non-conforming use of a non-conforming building or structure may be changed only to another non-conforming use of the same or more restrictive classification. 
b.  In no case shall a non-conforming building or structure be enlarged beyond the existing square footage for the purpose of extending the non-conforming use. 
c.  In no case shall independent structures or buildings be constructed which will provide support to existing non-conforming uses. 
d.  In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or structure is discontinued without interruption for a period of twelve (12) months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to uses permitted in the district in which it is located. 
e.  Reserved. 
Sec. C. - Non-conforming uses of land. 
(1)  The non-conforming use of land lawfully existing at the time this ordinance became effective shall be discontinued within one year from the effective date of this ordinance and within said year shall be continued upon the following conditions and not otherwise: 
a.  The non-conforming use of a piece of land shall in no way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property. 
b.  The non-conforming use of a piece of land may in no way be changed to another non-conforming use, but only to a use conforming to the regulations of the district in which the land is located. 
c.  In the event that the original non-conforming use of a piece of land is discontinued for sixty (60) days or more, the land shall thereafter conform to all regulations for the district in which the land is located. 
d.  The aforementioned provisions regarding non-conforming use of land shall apply where either: 
i.  No building is employed in connection with such use. 
ii.  Buildings employed are accessory or incidental to such use. 
iii.  Such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building. 
e.  Non-conformance due to reclassification. 
f.  The aforementioned provisions of this article shall also apply to buildings, structures, land, and uses which hereafter become non-conforming due to any reclassification of districts under this ordinance or subsequent change in the regulations of this ordinance. 
Sec. D. - Removal of destroyed buildings. 
Any dwelling which is damaged beyond repair by fire, natural or manmade disaster shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the State of Georgia. 
Sec. E. - Buffers between dissimilar districts. 
(1)  Objective. The objective of providing buffers and landscaped areas for screening between dissimilar districts is to protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of adjacent land uses. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Buffer : A barrier which is created by the use of evergreen trees or other acceptable plant or vegetative material alone or in combination with berms, fencing, or walls used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or dissimilar uses. 
b.  Natural/Undisturbed Buffer : An existing natural barrier which contains a stand of evergreen trees or other acceptable vegetative material with a density or intensity which meets the intent of the definition of buffer. 
c.  Planted/Landscaped buffer : A planted natural barrier which contains a stand of evergreen trees or other acceptable vegetative material with a density or intensity which meets the intent of the definition of buffer. 
(3)  Buffer requirements. The buffer area may be included within the required setbacks; however, in such case that the required buffer is greater than the required setback, the required buffer shall be adhered to. Buffers are required to be installed on properties adjacent to dissimilar districts in accordance with the following specifications: 
MINIMUM BUFFER WIDTH REQUIREMENTS (1) 

 
Note— Reference paragraph (6) herein for required buffer area along stream banks, water ways, or watercourses. 
*Must provide buffer area for subdivision developments. 
(4)  Standards. Buffers are subject to review and approval by the Operations Manager Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after review and recommendation by the Planning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. The landscaping policies and standards listed in this section are the minimum policies and standards for buffers. The following are required standards for buffers and shall be used by the Planning Staff, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager in reviewing development applications. 
a.  Buffers shall be designated on the site plan as a permanent buffer strip. 
b.  Buffers shall be natural/undisturbed areas of existing mature trees which meet the intent of the definition of buffer. Where substantially devoid of existing trees, or where it is necessary to disturb the existing natural/undisturbed area, a planted/landscaped buffer shall be established in accordance with this section. 
c.  Buffers shall be established and maintained along required adjoining property to meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the above table. 
d.  Buffers shall be of such nature and density at species maturity to screen activities and uses on the lot from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot. Buffers shall not be closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way unless approved by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after review and recommendation by the Planning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
e.  Buffers shall provide year-round visual screening from the ground to a height of at least 6 feet. 
f.  Buffers that utilize trees and/or other vegetation shall be installed not only to provide visual screening but to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
g.  Buffer design shall be integrated with the overall design concept for the project. 
h.  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be undisturbed except for the addition of supplemental plantings or other approved screening devices, or for the provision of required access or utility crossings as approved by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after review and recommendation by the Planning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. Where a buffer is substantially devoid of trees or shrubbery, grading may be allowed within the buffer area prior to replanting or the provision of other screening devices as required. 
i.  Said buffer areas may not be used for any parking or for the erection of any permanent structure thereon except a fence. 
j.  No artificial plants, trees, or other artificial vegetation shall be installed. 
k.  All existing, healthy deciduous and hardwood trees with a caliper of 5 or more inches at a point 4½ feet above the natural grade shall be retained, whenever feasible; if not feasible the tree shall be replaced with the same or similar type of tree in accordance with the intent of paragraph (1) below. 
l.  All planted trees shall be native to this region and, when planted, such replacement tree shall be a minimum height of 6 feet and be a species which will reach at least 20 feet in height at maturity or shall be a flowering tree with a minimum height of 6 feet at time of planting. All plantings shall be in staggered rows, with vegetation spaced a minimum of ten feet apart (measured trunk to truck) with a minimum of two staggered rows of plantings for every ten feet of buffer width. The following are approved for such plantings, but shall not be exclusive of other vegetation which may be suitable as approved by the Operations Manager Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after review and recommendation by the Planning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, provided they form a visible screen: Leyland Cypress, Bufordi Holly (Dwarf Holly), Ilex Opaca (Savannah Holly), Ilex Chinese (Nellie R. Stevens Holly), Pinus Strobus (White Pine), Magnolia Gradiflora (Southern Magnolia), Cleara Japonica, Green Ash, Mountain Laurel, Black Gum, Hop Horneam, Oak Species (Scarlet, Southern Red, Swamp Chestnut, Sawtooth, Chestnut), Linden or Basswood, Viburnum. 
(5)  Maintenance. 
a.  All buffers shall be installed in a sound workmanship-like manner and according to accepted and proper planting procedures which meet the intent of the buffer requirements. 
b.  Once installed, the owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all buffers, which shall be maintained in good condition to as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, which meets the intent of the buffer requirements. 
c.  Should the vegetation die or be removed such that the buffer no longer functions as required, that vegetation must be replaced by the owner. 
d.  The owner shall have thirty (30) days to replace missing or damaged trees, or restore buffer areas to meet the intent of the buffer requirements. 
(6)  Required stream protection buffer. All developments must comply with the Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in order to protect natural water ways within all zoning categories and enhance water quality within the incorporated limits of the City. All buffer areas are required to be included on all development construction drawings. 
(7)  Variance from buffers. The Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager after review and recommendation by the Planning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, may waive or vary the buffer requirements of this section as stated herein, if and only if: 
a.  It is clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation achieve the purpose and intent of this section. 
b.  It is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, a fence, wall, and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground level from view from the normal level of a first story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 
Sec. F. - General building, area, and yard provisions. 
Except as herein otherwise provided: 
(1)  No building or structure shall be erected, and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, designed, or intended to be used, for any purpose or in any manner other than is set forth in this Ordinance or amendments thereto as permitted in the zoning district in which such building or land is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be reconstructed or structurally altered, to exceed in height the limit established in this Ordinance or amendments thereto designated for the zoning district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No existing building or structure shall be enlarged unless the lot meets the minimum land area requirements of the zoning district in which said building is located. 
(4)  Every building hereafter erected shall be erected on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one principal residential building on any one lot except in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(5)  No building shall hereafter be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 30-feet on a publicly dedicated, publicly approved, or publicly maintained street or on a dedicated easement connecting with a public way which guarantees ingress an egress for perpetuity subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(6)  No accessory building, structure, or use shall be erected on or project into any required front or side yard. 
(7)  Where a rear yard abuts upon a street, no accessory building, structure, or use shall be located nearer to the rear lot line than the required front yard depth of the zoning district in which the rear yard is located. 
(8)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projection of a cornice, eave, belt cornice, sill, canopy, or other similar architectural feature projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into said yard. 
(9)  Landscape features such as trees, flowers, or plants shall be permitted in any required front, side, or rear yard provided they do not violate the provisions of paragraph (14) below. 
(10)  No yard or other open space provided for about a building for the purposes of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance or amendments thereto shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard, or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
(11)  If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two (2) streets not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirements for the district in which the lot is located. 
(12)  On a corner lot, when the frontage of one street exceeds the frontage of the other, the one with the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. The side yard setback for a corner lot shall be twenty-five (25) feet in all zoning districts except where otherwise noted herein. 
(13)  No lot shall be so reduced or diminished so that the yard, or other open space, or total lot area, shall be smaller than prescribed by this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, nor shall the allowable density of the zoning district be altered in any manner except in conformity with this Ordinance. 
(14)  In all zoning districts, no fence, structure, planting, or other obstruction (above a height of three (3) feet) shall be maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
(15)  No residential or commercial building or any type residence including manufactured homes shall hereafter be erected or placed on a lot without prior application for an approved septic tank and nitrification field. No occupancy of such buildings or mobile homes is permitted until the approved septic tank and nitrification field have been completely installed. This shall not apply where public sewerage is used at the property, provided it is properly connected. 
Sec. G. - Limited number of unrelated persons in certain residential districts. 
(1)  All dwelling units within the single family residential districts, including but not limited to R-2, R-2 with sewer, OSRD, PRD, Low Density Quality Residential District and Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District, shall be restricted to occupancy by a family and up to no more than two (2) other persons who are not related to any of the family members by blood, legal adoption or marriage within the third degree of consanguinity or within the second degree of affinity, except as specifically required by federal or state law. 
a.  There shall be allowed a single exception, whereby a non-family member and/or his family may reside in a single family residence for a period of not more than three months (90 days), with other persons who are not family, provided that such occupancy is due to either a medical hardship or when the persons residing as guests are in the process of building another single family residence for their home and are staying by necessity of same. 
b.  The non-family members may not reside in the home for more than the 90 day period provided for in this subsection, and this exception may not be claimed at a single property location or address more than one time in any twelve month period. 
c.  In the event persons cited under this subsection raise this exception, the burden of proof is on the property owner/occupant to prove the exception, and rebut the citation. In doing so, the property owner and occupants of the home must show competent evidence of the short term occupancy due to medical hardship or the building of another single family residence, with such evidence including, but not limited to documentation from a physician (in the case of medical hardship) and an executed contract for the purchase of a residence. The cited location shall be subject to re-inspection upon the end of the claimed 90 day period. 
(2)  For the purpose of this ordinance herein, "family" shall be defined as set forth in the definitions section of the Zoning Ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(3)  Prima facie proof of occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than two (2) unrelated persons is established in any prosecution for violation of this section if it is shown that the same four (4) or more vehicles with registration to persons having different surnames and addresses were parked overnight at the dwelling unit a majority of nights in any thirty day (30-day) period. This establishment of a prima facie level of proof in this subsection does not preclude a showing of "occupancy" of a dwelling unit by a person in any other manner, including but not limited to driver's licenses and personal admissions. 
(4)  The property owner and any agent of the property owner and/or the tenant of the property owner shall be legally responsible for directly or indirectly allowing, permitting, causing or failing to prohibit the occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than three (3) unrelated persons. 
(5)  Enforcement of the definition of the term "family" and this ordinance and subsection shall commence with a written notice of violation provided to the owner of the premises or their agent or tenant, whichever may apply, and shall be delivered personally or by first class mail to the owner's address as listed in the tax assessor's records at least seven (7) days prior to citation being issued. 
(6)  A violation of this ordinance and subsection shall be a misdemeanor and subject to the following penalties: 
a.  First Offense: a minimum fine of $300.00, none of which may be subject to payment suspension, and 60 days in jail and 100 hours of community service or some combination thereof; 
b.  Second Offense: a minimum fine of $400.00, none of which may be subject to payment suspension, and 60 days in jail and 100 hours of community service or some combination thereof; 
c.  Third Offense: a minimum fine of $500.00, none of which may be subject to payment suspension, and with a mandatory Court appearance and 60 days in jail and 100 hours community service or some combination thereof. 
d.  The maximum penalties shall be set at $1,000.00, 60 days in jail and 100 hours of community service or some combination thereof, per violation of this ordinance. 
Such violation shall be heard and adjudicated in the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia and any decision of the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia shall be appealable within thirty (30) days of such decision by written appeal to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARKING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. A. - Design standards for off-street automobile parking. 
The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall have authority to permit, inspect, and issue Certificates of Occupancy to all developments within the City of Hiram, Georgia. Enforcement of building code shall be under purview of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia. Enforcement of Zoning Violations shall be under the purview of the Police Department, of the City of Hiram, Georgia which shall be heard and adjudicated in the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia and which may be appealed from any decision of the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia by written appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
(1)  Design Standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Shall have access to a public street or easement approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia; 
b.  Entrances and exits shall be graded and paved as specified by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and shall be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; 
c.  Paved parking facilities shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curbstones or other similar designations in accord with the following: 
i.  Each space set at a ninety degree (90°) angle shall have not less than one hundred sixty-two (162) square feet and shall be not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches wide and nineteen (19) feet deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet wide; 
ii.  Each space set at a sixty degree (60°) angle shall have not less than one hundred seventy-six (176) square feet and shall be not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches wide and twenty (20) feet eight (8) inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet six (6) inches; 
iii.  Each space set at a forty-five degree (45°) angle shall have not less than one hundred sixty-five (165) square feet and shall be not less than eight (8) feet six (6) inches wide and nineteen (19) feet five (5) inches deep, exclusive of passageways, which shall be not less than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches wide; 
iv.  There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street; 
d.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
e.  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
f.  Any parking areas within the required front yard of any structure shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any public right-of-way. 
g.  The provision of (c), (e), and (f) above shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three (3) or less spaces are required. 
(2)  Location. All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  The required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided herein; 
b.  If vehicular parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to such principal use. The Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, will consider each case and forward their recommendation to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for final action. Such vehicular parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not hereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner; and 
c.  The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sunday may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
Sec. B. - Required spaces. 
The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 

 
Sec. C. - Site distance at intersections. 
In all zoning districts, no fence, structure, planting, or other obstruction (above a height of three (3) feet) shall be maintained with fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
Sec. D. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
On the same premises with every building or structure erected hereafter and occupied for any manufacturing, processing, or related uses, storage, warehousing, wholesaling, or related uses, and retailing, trade, and its related uses involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with the public use of sidewalk, street, or alley. Such space unless otherwise adequately provided for shall include at minimum: 
(1)  A twelve (12) foot by twenty-five (25) foot loading space, with fourteen (14) feet overhead clearance for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or fraction thereof in excess of seven thousand (7,000) square feet of floor area of land used for above-mentioned purpose. 
(2)  An off-street loading space or spaces of sufficient dimensions and size to allow normal off-street loading an unloading operations of a kind appropriate to the property served thereby, where the floor area of land used for above mentioned purposes is less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet. 
(3)  In no case shall a loading berth or loading space be so located as to hinder the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, alley, or access route to or from an off-street parking area. 
(4)  Any light used to illuminate any parking/loading area shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from adjoining premises in a residential district. 
Sec. E. - Building, lot, and setback table. 
(Reference Article VI, Sec. E. (6) pertaining to required buffer area along stream banks, water ways, or water courses) 

 
1 *Where required buffers exceed setback requirements, buffer widths shall be adhered to (see chart, p.37) (a) Corner lot on local street (b) In Cul-de-sac (c) With public sewer & 1,800 sq. ft. heated area; otherwise, 20,00 sq. ft. lot and 1,100 sq. ft. heated area (d) If abuts residential 
ARTICLE VIII. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. A. - A-1 Agricultural Zoning District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The A-1 District is comprised of land having a predominantly rural character and provides locations for large parcels of undeveloped land, agricultural uses, and single-family residential uses on larger tracts of land. These areas are generally within or on the edge of properties delineated for residential categories. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the A-1 Agricultural Zoning District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings and Class II manufactured homes (in accordance with Ordinance Relating to Erection, Installation, and Use of Factory-Built Buildings and Dwelling Units, Manufactured Homes, and Mobile Homes) with a minimum of 1,100 square feet of heated area required. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until either (a) construction on the main building has been actually commenced or (b) until the applicant has received approval by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, after a review and recommendations from the Public Works Executive Committee, of Paulding County, Georgia, for the construction thereof. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  Accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall not be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and may not be utilized for the operation of a business from the accessory building. 
(c)  Recreational Buildings: If the agricultural property lot is larger than 25 acres, then it shall be permitted to construct a Recreational Building in additional to other permitted structures on the property, provided the same has a water and sewage/septic system, receives a valid Certificate of Occupancy, from the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and is subject to a minimum setback of 150 feet from all adjacent property lines. 
1.  Recreational Buildings shall not be utilized for the operation of a business from the Recreation building nor shall it be occupied as a permanent residence. 
(d)  Agricultural facilities such as chicken houses, swine enclosures, dairy barns, stables, corrals, or other facilities used to house livestock, horses, non-domestic animals (excluding wild and exotic animals), poultry, or odor producing agricultural uses shall be located no less than 50 feet from the side and rear property lines and 100 feet from the front property line. Fences for horses and cows are excluded from these setbacks, but are recommended to be setback off the property line by a minimum of three (3) inches. 
(e)  Agriculture, farming, and forestry activities; livestock, poultry production, and horses provided that all animals except those generally recognized as household pets are kept in a structure, pen, or corral and not permitted to roam at large. Structures, pens, fences, and corrals must meet setbacks as specified in (d) above. 
(f)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(g)  Commercial and private dog kennels, provided all outdoor runs, fences, and related buildings/structures shall be located no less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(h)  Home office, residential business, rural business, subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(i)  In-home children's day care subject to a special use permit and all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(j)  Landscaping nurseries (wholesale), green houses (wholesale), provided structures shall be located no less than 50 feet from the side and rear property lines and 100 feet from the front property line. 
(k)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other government uses. 
(l)  Sale of agricultural products raised on the premises; agricultural farm stands. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements. * 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. B. - R-2 Suburban Residential District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The "R-2" district is composed of certain lands and structures in the city having a low density, predominantly single-family character and additional open area, where it is desirable and likely that such similar development will occur. This district emphasizes suburban-urban development rather than rural activities; however, it is recognized that agriculture and the raising of poultry and livestock may still be an activity in this district, and provision is, therefore, made for limited forms of such activity with appropriate safeguard for nearby residences. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-2 Suburban Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings and Class II manufactured homes (in accordance with Ordinance Relating to Erection, Installation, and Use of Factory-Built Buildings and Dwelling Units, Manufactured Homes, and Mobile Homes) with a minimum of 1,100 square feet heated, living space. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot less than 3 acres until construction on the main building has been commenced. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  No accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
4.  Accessory buildings are limited in size to 1000 square feet per acre of land within the parcel. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and may not be utilized for the operation of a business from the accessory building. 
(c)  Recreational Buildings: If the residential property lot is larger than 10 acres, then it shall be permitted to construct a Recreational Building in additional to other permitted structures on the property, provided the same has a water and sewage/septic system, receives a valid Certificate of Occupancy, issued by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and is subject to a minimum setback of 150 feet from all adjacent property lines. 
1.  Recreational Buildings shall not be utilized for the operation of a business from the Recreation building nor shall it be occupied as a permanent residence. 
(d)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(e)  Sale of agricultural products raised on the premises. 
(f)  Home office, or residential business, or rural business, subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other government uses. 
(h)  Agricultural facilities such as chicken houses, swine enclosures, dairy barns, stables, corrals, or other facilities used to house livestock, horses, non-domestic animals (excluding wild and exotic animals), poultry, or odor producing agricultural uses shall be located no less than 200 feet from the side and rear property lines and 300 feet from the front property line. Fences for horses and cows are excluded from these setbacks, but are recommended to be setback off the property line by a minimum of three (3) inches. 
(i)  Agriculture, farming, and forestry activities; livestock, poultry production, and horses provided that all animals except those generally recognized as household pets are kept in a structure, pen, or corral and not permitted to roam at large. Structures, pens, fences, and corrals must meet setbacks as specified in (h) above. 
(j)  In-home children's day care subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(k)  Recreational areas platted as part of a residential subdivision development, provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(7)  Landscaping requirement: All R-2 platted subdivision developments shall include a minimum of one (1) tree planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
Sec. C. - R-2 with Sewer Sewered Suburban Residential District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is established to provide locations for single-family residential uses on lots in areas which are urbanizing and where public sewer is predominately available or proposed. 
(2)  Zoning Required. To develop in the R-2 with sewer district, a rezoning shall be required even on tracts currently zoned as R-2 Suburban Residential District. 
(3)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-2 with sewer Sewered Suburban Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings and Class II manufactured homes (in accordance with Ordinance Relating to Erection, Installation, and Use of Factory-Built Buildings and Dwelling Units, Manufactured Homes, and Mobile Homes) with a minimum of 1,800 square feet of heated area required on lots with 15,000 square feet. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until construction on the main building has been actually commenced. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  No accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
4.  Accessory buildings are limited in size 1000 square feet per acre of land contained in the parcel. There shall not be more than one accessory building which is 1000 square feet or larger per parcel. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and shall not be used for agricultural purposes or for farm animals. 
6.  Accessory buildings shall not be utilized for the operation of a business from the accessory building. 
(4)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(5)  Home office, or residential business, or rural business, subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other government uses. 
(7)  In-home children's day care subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(8)  Recreational areas platted as part of a residential subdivision development, provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(9)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(10)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(11)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(12)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(13)  All R-2 with sewer tracts which are platted as a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but also must include the following amenities: 
(a)  Underground Utilities; 
(b)  Street Lights; 
(c)  Sidewalks on at least one side of each residential street and entrance drive. 
(14)  Landscaping requirement: All R-2 with sewer developments shall include a minimum of two (2) trees planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
(15)  Green Space for sewered developments with 15,000 square foot lots: A platted R-2 with sewer subdivision developed with 15,000 square foot lots shall be designed to include at least ten percent (10%) of the total area designated for open space or public use. One hundred percent (100%) of the open space must be located outside of the flood plain as defined by the Department of Community Development, or Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. The open space areas must be defined and delineated on specific site plans for the subdivisions as open space or public use and must be accompanied by an appropriate deed and protective covenants stating the open space is perpetual. The required open space shall remain undeveloped or be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved landscape plan through the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. The recreational and/or amenities areas of the subdivision may not be calculated as a portion of the greenspace requirement, unless such recreational areas are pervious in nature. In addition thereto, at least 50% of the designated greenspace area must be contiguous in nature. 
(16)  Mandatory Homeowners Associations and Required Recreational Areas and Amenities: Each property developed in accordance within the R-2 with sewer requirements shall be required to provide for a mandatory incorporated homeowners' association and protective covenants. With regard thereto, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association and the association must be established prior to selling any of the homes. The Association must be mandatory for each homeowner and they must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities. 
(17)  Buffer Requirements: For all R-2 with sewer platted subdivisions, a minimum of a 25 foot natural and undisturbed perimeter buffer should be included, even if the proposed R-2 with sewer platted subdivision is contiguous to another R-2 with sewer zoned property, or other residentially zoned categories. The buffer requirements for R-2 with sewer platted properties when located contiguous to other zoning categories shall remain as listed in the Table for Buffer Width Requirements contained herein. 
Sec. D. - R-4 Multi-Family Non Fee Simple (Rental) Residential District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is specifically created to provide an area for multi-family housing which is occupied as non fee simple, rental housing, including but not limited to, apartment homes and other such rental communities. Fee simple units which are sold to individual owners in fee simple, including but not limited to fee-simple townhomes, and condominiums, are not included in this district. Multi-family non fee simple housing shall be defined as residential dwellings of three or more units which are attached by either the roof line of the structure or attached through a common heated structural wall. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-4 Multi-Family Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Multi-family residential dwellings of three or more units, including but not limited to, apartment buildings, provided the units are attached as set forth above, with the following amount of heated area: 
1.  One bedroom units, 800 square feet; 
2.  Two bedroom units, 1000 square feet; 
3.  Three bedroom units, 1200 square feet. 
(b)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(c)  Home office subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(e)  In-home children's day care subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(f)  Recreational areas developed as an amenity for the multi-family development provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(7)  Density: Density shall be calculated based upon only property zoned R-4 within the development. There shall be no more than five (5) units on any one (1) acre of R-4 zoned property. Density shall not be calculated by the gross density of the entire project site. 
(8)  Greenspace Requirement: An R-4 platted development of larger than 5 acres must include at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total area designated for undisturbed open space. One hundred percent (100%) of the open space must be located outside of the flood plain as defined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. The undisturbed open space areas must be defined and delineated on specific site plans for the subdivisions as open space and must be accompanied by an appropriate deed and protective covenants stating the open space is perpetual. The required open space shall remain undeveloped or be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved landscape plan through the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(9)  Parking lot cooling and landscaping requirement: An R-4 platted development of larger than two (2) acres must include a plan to create parking lot/asphalt cooling areas through landscaping including, but not limited to, the planting of a landscaped area of vegetation and at least one tree per eight (8) parking spaces within the parking area of the development. Said parking lot cooling landscape plan shall be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(10)  All R-4 developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but also must include the following amenities: 
(a)  Underground Utilities; 
(b)  Street Lights; 
(c)  Sidewalks on at least one side of each residential street and entrance drive; 
(d)  Permanent Entrance Monuments made of all-weather material with associated landscaping; 
(e)  All internal water and sanitary sewer systems shall be privately maintained with a Master Meter located on the City of Hiram, Georgia's, right of way near the entrance to the development; 
(f)  All infrastructures, including streets, roads, water, and sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations and Standard Details, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. E. - R-5 Duplex District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is established to provide an area suitable for the placement of duplex dwellings. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-5 Duplex District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Duplexes containing a minimum size of 1100 square feet of heated area per unit, (2200 square feet of heated area minimum per building). 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until construction on the main building has been actually commenced. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  Accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall not be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size, nor shall there be more than one per dwelling unit. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and shall not be used for agricultural purposes or for farm animals. 
6.  Accessory buildings shall not be utilized for the operation of a business from the accessory building. 
(c)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(d)  Home office, or residential business, or rural business, subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(f)  In-home children's day care subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(g)  Recreational areas platted as part of a residential subdivision development, provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(7)  Green-space Requirement: An R-5 platted development containing more than three (3) duplex structures must include at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total area designated for open space or public use. One hundred percent (100%) of the open space must be located outside of the flood plain as defined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. The open space or public use areas must be defined and delineated on specific site plans for the subdivisions as open space and must be accompanied by an appropriate deed and protective covenants stating the open space is perpetual. The required open space shall remain undeveloped or be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved landscape plan through the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(8)  Landscaping requirement: All R-5 developments containing more than three (3) duplex structures shall include a minimum of one (1) trees planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
Sec. F. - R-6 Manufactured Home Park District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is established to provide an area for the placement of manufactured homes. This district shall be composed of certain land in the City of Hiram, Georgia, where the construction of a manufactured home park district will not be inappropriate to the existing development of the district wherein the manufactured home park district is proposed. In addition, the manufactured home park district should be harmonious with the existing development which is in place in the area where the district is proposed. To determine the appropriateness of any application for rezoning of any land to the "R-6" category, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and shall make such recommendation to the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, as they deem appropriate. An affirmative recommendation to rezone to "R-6" shall include a description of the boundaries of the proposed "R-6" district. Any consideration of an application for rezoning to this category shall be made according to the standards and criteria for all other zoning matters. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-6 Manufactured Home Park District, the only permitted uses shall be for manufactured homes located in approved manufactured home parks, home office or residential business, in-home day care subject to provisions of this Ordinance, and such accessory buildings or structures as may be appropriate and in conjunction with manufactured homes, subject to the following: 
(a)  No accessory building shall be placed or constructed on a lot until a permit has been obtained for the manufactured home. 
(b)  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
(c)  Accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall not be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
(d)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed 100 square feet in size, nor shall there be more than one per dwelling unit. 
(e)  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and shall not be used for agricultural purposes or for farm animals. 
(f)  Accessory buildings shall not be utilized for the operation of a business from the accessory building. 
(3)  Conditions of operation. Each manufactured home park district shall provide the following minimum facilities on the site for the common use of all manufactured home occupants: 
(a)  Drives: Paved drives shall be provided to each manufactured home space, to laundry or other service buildings, and to recreation areas. These drives shall be constructed to all specifications of the Subdivision Regulations, of Paulding County, Georgia, except for requirements regarding right-of-way dimensions and installation of utilities. 
(b)  Utilities: All utility services shall be underground provided, however, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, may indicate certain specific utility lines which may be left above-ground based upon the specific circumstances concerning the request after the public hearing on the application, and these recommendations shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for final action. 
(c)  Landscaping: Each district shall have adequate landscaping with shade trees and exterior screen planting as approved by the Department of Community Development Planning staff, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(d)  Recreation area: Each district will provide a minimum recreation area of five hundred (500) square feet for each lot in the manufactured home park. Any recreation area so designated shall be not less than one (1) acre in size. 
(e)  Storage area: Each manufactured home park zone shall provide a fenced area for the storage of boats, trailers, etc. The minimum area for the storage area shall be one-half (½) acre for each fifty (50) manufactured home spaces which are provided in the district. 
(4)  Improvements to manufactured homes. 
(a)  Any permanent additions to any manufactured home located within the manufactured home park district must be approved by the Department of Community Development Inspections Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, in the same manner as any other structure in City of Hiram. 
(b)  The owner of the manufactured home park shall install a concrete patio or a wooden deck on each manufactured home lot. 
(5)  Required lot area and density. 
(a)  No manufactured home park district shall be constructed or maintained on a lot or tract which has an average width of less than four hundred (400) feet or a total area of less than fifteen (15) acres. 
(b)  Each manufactured home space shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width and shall provide a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet in area. On cul-de-sacs or curb street designs, the width shall be at least fifty (50) feet at the location of the manufactured home unit. 
(c)  Each manufactured home lot shall be defined by a marker at each corner. 
(d)  The density of each manufactured home park district shall not exceed five (5) units per acre. Density is not calculated based upon gross acreage and is exclusive of any recreation area, sewage treatment plant area, wetlands area, streets, or other areas which are not useable as lots but which are included within the boundary survey of the manufactured home park. 
(6)  Yard requirements. No manufactured home shall be located within: 
(a)  Ten (10) feet of its individual lot line. 
(b)  Forty (40) feet from any exterior boundary of the manufactured home park district. 
(7)  Buffer strip requirements. A natural buffer strip of at least twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the manufactured home park district (reference Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance). 
(8)  Off-street parking. A paved driveway, connecting to the interior street, shall be provided on each manufactured home park lot, sufficient in length and width to serve as two (2) off-street parking spaces. 
(9)  Sewage and water supply shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
(a)  A central sewage system, approved by the State of Georgia's Environmental Protection Division and the appropriate Departments of Paulding County, Georgia, and the City of Hiram, Georgia, must be utilized. There shall be no individual septic tanks in the manufactured home park district. The sewer system must be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but shall remain private within the interior of the Development. 
(b)  Water must be obtained through the public water supply. Water lines within the development shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia. A master water meter for the development shall be placed within the right of way, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Private Wells will not be allowed in the manufactured home park district. 
(10)  Solid waste. A solid waste collection system, approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall be provided by the owner of the manufactured home park. 
Sec. G. - R-7 Multi-Family Fee Simple (Non-Rental) Residential District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is specifically created to provide an area for multi-family housing which is occupied as fee simple, non-rental housing. Units which are sold to individual owners in fee simple, including but not limited to fee-simple townhomes and condominiums are included in this district. Non-fee simple multi-family rental homes are not included in this district. Multi-family housing shall be defined as residential dwellings of three or more units which are attached by either the roof line of the structure or attached through a common heated structural wall. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the R-7 Multi-Family Fee Simple Residential District, the following uses are permitted: 
(a)  Multi-family residential dwellings of three or more units, provided the units are attached as set forth above, with the following amount of heated area: 
1.  One bedroom units, 800 square feet; 
2.  Two bedroom units, 1,000 square feet; 
3.  Three bedroom units, 1,200 square feet. 
(b)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres, provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(c)  Home office subject to provisions of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Municipal, county, State of Georgia, federal and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(e)  In-home children's day care subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(f)  Recreational areas developed as an amenity for the multi-family development provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by State Environmental Health. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(7)  Density: Density shall be calculated based upon only property zoned R-7 within the development. There shall be no more than four (4) units on any one (1) acre of R-7 zoned property. Density shall not be calculated by the gross density of the entire project site. 
(8)  Greenspace Requirement: An R-7 platted development of larger than 5 acres must include at least twelve percent (12%) of the total area designated for undisturbed open space. One hundred percent (100%) of the open space must be located outside of the flood plain as defined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. The undisturbed open space areas must be defined and delineated on specific site plans for the subdivisions as open space and must be accompanied by an appropriate deed and protective covenants stating the open space is perpetual. The required open space shall remain undeveloped or be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved landscape plan through the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(9)  Landscaping requirement: All R-7 developments shall include a minimum of one (1) trees planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
(10)  All R-7 developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but also must include the following amenities: 
(a)  Underground Utilities; 
(b)  Street Lights; 
(c)  Sidewalks on at least one side of each residential street and entrance drive; 
(d)  Permanent Entrance Monuments made of all-weather material with associated landscaping; 
(e)  A minimum of a one (1) Car Garage per dwelling unit for one (1) and two (2) bedroom units and a two (2) Car Garage for all three (3) bedroom units, provided however, garage buildings may be constructed separately from the residential buildings; 
(f)  All utilities shall be public and constructed according to the Development Regulations and Standard Details, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. H. - PRD Planned Residential Development. 
The Planned Residential Development District is a district that promotes the proper use of larger tracts of land in a flexible, innovative, and creative concept. This district encourages the preservation of the natural amenities of the land, and provides a stable residential environment as it plans for an efficient use of the land by comprehensive and detailed use for streets, utilities, and building sites. These plans shall also include specific areas dedicated for open space use with the appropriate covenants to insure permanent maintenance of said areas. In addition, plans for approval by the governing authority shall require the provision of a central sewage disposal system as approved City of Hiram, Georgia, Paulding County Georgia, and the State of Georgia authorities, as applicable. Major deviations from these detailed plans have to be re-submitted to the governing authority for approval. 
A Planned Development District must consist of a minimum of fifty (50) contiguous acres of land with at least ten percent (10%) of the total area designated for open space or public use. These areas shall be defined and delineated on specific site plans with appropriate deed covenants to ensure adherence to the submitted plans. Fifty percent (50%) of said open space must be located outside a flood plain and remain pervious and undisturbed as defined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
The required open space shall be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an landscaping plan that have been approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
Individual lot and dwelling sizes are to be approved when specific plans are submitted to the governing authority, with the provision that the maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre in a PRD shall not exceed 3.0 units. This allows for a more efficient lot layout in respect to the natural features of the property. 
(1)  Purpose. The Planned Residential Development District is a residential district that provides for the proper development of larger tracts of land in a coordinated, well planned manner. The features of this district include the following: 
(a)  Efficient land utilization 
(b)  Innovative design. 
(c)  Provides a stable residential environment. 
(d)  Preserves and protects natural and environmentally sensitive areas. 
(e)  Encourages the use of open space and recreation areas. 
(f)  Provides for a plan of development that is compatible with adjacent and nearby properties. 
(g)  Insures compliance of objectives by the inclusion of protective deed covenants. 
(2)  Guidelines for review. The review of the Planned Residential District shall consider the following general intentions, objectives, and purpose prior to approval by the governing authority: 
(a)  Whether the development will be compatible with the topography, hydrology, and other natural features of the land, and whether any unusual topographic or other natural features will be affected. 
(b)  Whether the character, design, and layout of the proposed uses will be adequate and appropriate to encourage a desirable living environment. 
(c)  Whether the development will adversely affect any adjacent properties. 
(d)  Whether the development will be able to preserve the natural amenities of streams, wooded areas, wetlands, and other similar features. 
(e)  Whether the existing and or proposed streets, utilities, and other public services are adequate to serve the development. 
(f)  Whether protective deed covenants are established to provide for the perpetual maintenance, security, and the continuation of dedicated area. 
(3)  Types of permitted uses. The Planned Residential District is a planned district that permits uses that are primarily residential in character and shall consist of single-family detached dwelling units and single family detached senior living residential dwelling units with customary home occupations and appropriate accessory uses and structures, and limited recreational uses, as approved by the governing authority. Churches, schools, and limited day-care facilities planned as part of the PRD, at its application inception, are also allowed; provided however, that such uses, if introduced as a part of the PRD development after the PRD development has been reviewed and approved by the governing authority, shall require review and approval by the applicable governing authority through a subsequent amended application process. 
(4)  Minimum site area. The minimum site area shall be restricted to no less than fifty (50) contiguous acres developed under one coordinated plan. 
(5)  Gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre in a PRD shall not exceed 3.0 units. 
(6)  Ownership. The PRD site shall be under single ownership and a unified control until developed in accordance with an approved plan. If the common open space is to be deeded to a Homeowner's Association, the developer shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the association and the association must be established prior to selling any of the homes. The Association must be mandatory for each homeowner and they must be responsible for liability insurance, local taxes, and the maintenance of recreational and other facilities. 
(7)  Application for approval of a Planned Residential Development. An application for a Planned Residential Development shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, Planning and Zoning Division as provided for in this Ordinance, and shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning. Public hearings will be held in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. Final consideration of Planned Residential Development Applications shall be given by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. All applications shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
The application shall be supported by a written statement of intent and a site development plan. At the time of construction, a more detailed site development plan shall be provided consistent with plan review standards established by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(8)  Site Development Plan. At the time of application for PRD, the site development plan shall contain the following: 
(a)  A general location map indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads, and the adjacent areas. 
(b)  Proposed land uses for the site and the acreage to be devoted to each land use category. 
(c)  Surveyed boundaries, prepared by a registered surveyor, of the entire tract and its relationship to adjoining properties and public right-of-way. 
(d)  Standard lot layout design. 
(e)  General street layout configuration. 
(f)  A fifteen foot (15') undisturbed buffer area on the perimeter of the property shall be indicated, and a landscape plan as applicable. 
(g)  Existing topographic condition with contour intervals of ten feet (10') or less; areas that have slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) shall be identified. 
(h)  Location of any streams, lakes, swamps, wetlands, and the boundary and elevation of the 100-year flood plain if applicable, shall be identified. 
(i)  Locations of parks or common open space, tree areas to be retained or added, and other open spaces. Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use or used as a planned recreational area. 
(j)  A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating sequence of development of these various sections thereof and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase. A soil erosion plan prepared by a registered engineer or soil scientist indicating all of the techniques that will be employed during construction must be provided prior to land disturbance. 
(k)  The minimum lot size for building lots in the development shall be not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet and the minimum house size shall be not less than fourteen hundred (1,400) square feet of heated area. However, the minimum lot size may be reduced to eight thousand (8,000) square feet with a minimum house size of sixteen hundred (1,600) square feet of heated area. 
(l)  A note regarding the provision for sidewalks on one side of all streets. 
(9)  Landscaping requirement: All PRD developments shall include a minimum of two (2) trees planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
(10)  All PRD developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but also must include the following amenities: 
(a)  Underground Utilities; 
(b)  Street Lights; 
(c)  Sidewalks on at least one side of each residential street and entrance drive as set forth herein above; 
(d)  Permanent Entrance Monuments made of all-weather material with associated landscaping; 
(e)  A minimum of a two (2) Car Garage per dwelling unit. 
(11)  In the event that a PRD is submitted to be reviewed by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager's Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and that PRD development contains a commercial component as part of the overall development concept and the commercial component is a minimum of 25% of the overall acreage of the project, then the development may be considered a PRD-commercial concept development and the following shall apply: 
(a)  The total development must consist of a minimum of fifty (50) contiguous acres of land. 
(b)  Gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre in a PRD shall not exceed 3.0 units; provided however, that gross density in a PRD-commercial concept development may be calculated by using the entire acreage of the concept development including the commercial component. This provision ensures the overall residential density of the total development will not exceed the 3.0 units per acre at any time and the commercial portion shall not be the subject of a residential rezoning in violation of the 3.0 units per acre density allowed. 
(c)  The green-space requirement of a standard PRD zoning is not applicable to a PRD-Commercial concept development applied for under subsection 11 herein. 
(d)  All other requirements with regard to a standard PRD, including, but not limited to minimum square footage for lots and heated area of homes, site plan requirements, and landscaping shall apply. 
(12)  Senior Living detached residential dwellings in PRD's. Purpose: Senior Living pods and/or phases are allowed to be developed in Planned Residential Development Districts and must meet the following standards. The senior living pods and/or phases must be developed as an incorporated part of the overall PRD. Individually designated single family dwelling units are not allowed within pods or phases approved for other types of PRD permitted uses. 
The senior living pods/phases are designed to serve the housing needs of adults who are 55 years of age or older. It is recommended that these pods/phases be located in areas that facilitate pedestrian access to nearby commercial goods and services, and/or amenities/cultural facilities. These areas are intended to function as communities with parks and open spaces. At least 80% of the occupied units shall be occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older. The other 20% is not intended as a set aside for younger residents and efforts should be made to minimize the number of units that do not meet this requirement. 
The maximum area within a PRD allowed for a Senior Living component is 25% of the total site acreage. Other PRD standards, not specified in this Section shall apply. 
The following design standards shall apply to all Senior Living components of PRD's: 
Site and Architectural Design Standards 
(a)  All grassed areas shall be sodded; excluding natural and landscaped areas; 
(b)  All dwellings shall contain single car garages, at a minimum, which may be attached or detached. All units with front loaded garages shall have garage faces with decorative design treatments to enhance their appearances, i.e. carriage style doors, windows inserts, etc; 
(c)  Provide four foot (4') wide sidewalks and street trees adjacent to both sides of interior streets or private driveways; 
(d)  A four foot (4') wide walkway, constructed of concrete or decorative pavers, shall extend from the sidewalk to the steps, stoop, or porch of all homes; 
(e)  There shall be no open space requirement for developments of senior living pods/phases that is in addition to the overall PRD; and 
(f)  Street lights within the subdivision shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet (200') apart on average. 
Building Design Standards 
(a)  Homes shall be constructed of traditional design with brick, stone, masonry horizontal siding, and masonry shakes/shingles. Brick and/or stone shall constitute no less than seventy percent (70) (house front and sides) of the materials used. With accents of masonry siding or shakes/shingles for each building elevation; building standards must incorporate at least five (5) of the following building standards: 
1.  Dormers. 
2.  Bay or bow windows. 
3.  Garage setback at least 2 ft. behind the facade of the principal structure. 
4.  Covered porch entry (covered front porch). 
5.  Transoms or sidelights. 
6.  Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 2 ft.). 
7.  A roof with a pitch greater than 8:12 and a minimum overhang of 12 inches on all sides. 
8.  Columns, pillars, or posts on facade. 
9.  Arched or Palladian windows. 
10.  Hip or gable roof lines. 
11.  Front stoops and/or steps made of rock, brick, marble or other material as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager's Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  All dwellings shall incorporate accessibility standards which shall include the following: 
1.  A step-free feature to at least one entrance of the unit; 
2.  36-inch wide, clear passage doorways throughout the unit; 
3.  Wheelchair, step-free access to the following areas, at a minimum: kitchen; dining area; entertainment area (e.g., living room/den, great room, etc.); at least one bedroom; at least one full bathroom; and laundry room with washer/dryer connection; and 
4.  The installation of full sheets of ¾″ plywood, blocking and/or its equivalent in all bathrooms to allow for future installation, if necessary, of grab bars. 
Mandatory Homeowner's Association Required 
The mandatory homeowner's association requirement for PRD's shall also apply to the Senior Living Components of a PRD. The homeowner's association shall provide for building and grounds maintenance and repair, insurance and working capital. Said association shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate that the planned residential community has senior living pods/phases that are intended to provide housing for persons 55 years of age and older including maintaining surveys or affidavits verifying compliance with 55 years of age and older occupancy requirements as permitted by 42 U.S.C. Section 3607, (b)(2)(c) of the federal Fair Housing Act and implementing regulations. Said association shall provide an affirmative declaration to be governed by the "Georgia Property Owners' Association Act" (POA) and the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq. Said association shall also include declarations and bylaws including rules and regulations, which shall at a minimum, regulate and control the following within the Senior Living pod/phases of the PRD: 
(a)  Restriction on homes being occupied, at least 80% of the occupied units must be occupied by at least one resident who is age 55 years of age or older. The other 20% is not intended as a set aside for younger residents and efforts should be made to minimize the number of units that do not meet this requirements. 
(b)  Restrictions on persons under 18 years of age permanently residing in the senior living component. Permanently residing in the senior living component shall mean longer the 90 consecutive days in any 180 day period or establishing residency as defined by state or local law. However, the HOA shall provide for a hardship provision allowing for an owner/occupant to house and care for a child less than 18 years of age in situations where the owner/occupant assumes responsibility for caring for the child due to urgent circumstances stemming from actions not under the owner/occupant's control. The association may, but is not required to, allow for hardship exceptions to the requirement; 
(c)  Restrictions on single family residential use only and leasing of units. No more that 5% of the total units may be leased by individual owners at any one time; 
(d)  Except for a central amenity package designed for senior living, prohibit playground equipment, trampolines or like fixtures; Amenities designed for senior living shall be incorporated in the senior living component and may include the following: Indoor lap pool, outdoor pool, health and fitness center, aerobic studio, amphitheatre, and card and billiards rooms, tennis courts and walking trails, etc. 
(e)  The HOA shall also provide that the covenants automatically renew at the end of the 20 year term, unless 100% of the owners at that time vote that the covenants should not renew; and 
(f)  The HOA and/or community management association for the HOA shall give written notice to any grantee of the restrictions covered in this zoning at or before any sale or transfer of any property. 
Covenants and Restrictions 
Legally binding covenants and/or deed restriction that run with the land shall apply to all dedicated senior living pods/phases/areas/lots within a PRD that will bind the applicant, any assignee, mortgagee, or buyer, and all other parties that receive title to the property. The grantor must state in any deed or instrument conveying title to an approved senior living housing unit, that the property conveyed is intended to be housing for older persons and is subject to the restrictions contained in this Section. No covenant referencing any of the regulations or restrictions herein for housing for older persons housing unit shall be recorded until and unless said covenant contains restrictions approved by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, which are consistent with the requirements of this Section. Such review and response shall be completed within thirty (30) calendar days following date of submission of such documents to the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
The Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate that communities in approved senior living components of a PRD are intended to provide housing for persons 55 years of age and older including maintaining surveys or affidavits verifying compliance with 55 years of age and older occupancy requirements as permitted by 42 U.S.C. Section 3607, (b)(2)(c) of the Federal Fair Housing Act and implementing regulations. 
Area, Dimensional, and Design Standards 
(a)  A landscape strip shall be provided on the property as follows: 
1.  Minimum two-foot (2') wide landscape strip is required adjacent to the curb on both sides of all streets and shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Landscape strips along local streets shall be planted with sod and may include a variety of low, hardy shrubbery and flowering plants with mulched beds. Areas of exposed earth shall not be allowed. 
b.  All landscape materials required by this ordinance shall be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association. Such maintenance shall keep landscape materials healthy, neat, and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. 
(b)  All dwellings shall have a minimum 1,800 square feet (1,400 heated space); 
(c)  All dwellings shall be limited to single story, however, bonus rooms over garages and/or basements shall be allowed (excludes windowed basements due to topography); and 
(d)  Within the senior living component of a PRD, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Maximum density: Five (5) units per acre; however the maximum number of housing units and required greenspace approved for the overall PRD shall be maintained; 
2.  Minimum lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet; 
3.  Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'); 
4.  Maximum height of building: Thirty Five (35') feet; 
5.  Minimum front yard: Fifteen feet (15') from right-of-way line, including any porches; front entrance carports or garages must be twenty five feet (25') from right-of-way line. 
6.  Minimum side yard: Five feet (5'), with a minimum of at least fifteen feet (15') between buildings; and side yards adjacent to a street must be a minimum twenty five feet (25') from right-of-way line. 
7.  Minimum rear yard: Twenty feet (20'); 
8.  Any senior living pod/phase/area of a PRD that abuts a low density residential land use zoning district (2.5 units per acre or less) shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from said property line. 
9.  The minimum fifteen feet (15') perimeter buffer shall be also required for the senior living component of a PRD. 
Sec. I. - OSRD Open Space Residential Development. 
The Open Space Residential Development District (OSRD) promotes development strategies for large tracts of land that can help communities preserve open space and natural areas in residential housing developments. The OSRD strategically allows the clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive areas, which in-turn preserves groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. The clustering of houses and structures also reduces the amount of infrastructure required to serve the development and lessens potential erosion and sedimentation impacts. The OSRD promotes interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the development and supports contiguous greenspace with adjacent communities. Walking trails, bike paths, public gathering places, use of parks and community facilities, as focal points are requirements of an OSRD. Other OSRD standards to promote coherent aesthetics within the community include landscaping requirements, underground utilities, recreational amenities, streetlights, sidewalks, and primary building setbacks. In addition, plans for OSRD approval by the governing authority shall require the provision of a public sewage disposal system as approved by the City of Hiram, Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and the State of Georgia, authorities, as applicable. 
An Open Space Residential Development District must consist of a minimum of fifty (50) contiguous acres of land with at least forty percent (40%) of the total area designated for open space. Individual lot and dwelling sizes are to be approved when specific plans are submitted to the governing authority, with the provision that the maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre in an OSRD shall not exceed 3.0 units. This allows for a more efficient lot layout in respect to the natural features of the property. 
(1)  Purpose. The Open Space Residential Development District is a residential district that provides for the proper development of larger tracts of land in a coordinated, well planned manner. The features of this district include the following: 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(2)  Guidelines for review. The review of the Open Space Residential Development District shall consider the following general intentions, objectives, and purpose prior to approval by the governing authority: 
(a)  Whether the development will be compatible with the topography, hydrology, and other natural features of the land, and whether any unusual topographic or other natural features will be affected. 
(b)  Whether the character, design, and layout of the proposed uses will be adequate and appropriate to encourage a desirable living environment. 
(c)  Whether the development will adversely affect any adjacent properties. 
(d)  Whether the development will be able to preserve the natural amenities of streams, wooded areas, wetlands, and other similar features. 
(e)  Whether the existing and or proposed streets, utilities, and other public services are adequate to serve the development. 
(f)  Whether protective deed covenants are established to provide for the perpetual maintenance, security, and the continuation of dedicated area. 
(3)  Types of permitted uses. The Open Space Residential Development District is a planned district that permits uses that are primarily residential in character and shall consist of single-family detached dwelling units with customary home occupations and appropriate accessory uses and structures, and limited recreational uses, as approved by the governing authority. Churches, schools, and limited day-care facilities planned as part of the OSRD, at its application inception, are also allowed; provided however, that such uses, if introduced as a part of the OSRD development after the OSRD development has been reviewed and approved by the governing authority, shall require review and approval by the governing authority through a subsequent amended application process. 
(4)  Minimum site area. The minimum site area shall be restricted to no less than fifty (50) contiguous acres developed under one coordinated plan. 
(5)  Gross density. The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre in an OSRD shall not exceed 3.0 units. 
(6)  Ownership of Development Site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(7)  Application for approval of an Open Space Residential Development. An application for an Open Space Residential Development shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, as provided for in this Ordinance, and shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning. Public hearings will be held in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted, and recommendations shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for final action. All applications shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
The application shall be supported by a written statement of intent and a site development plan. At the time of construction, a more detailed site development plan shall be provided consistent with plan review standards established by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(8)  Site Development Plan. At the time of application for OSRD, the site development plan shall contain the following: 
(a)  A general location map indicating existing zoning on the site, adjoining roads, and the adjacent areas. 
(b)  Proposed land uses for the site and the acreage to be devoted to each land use category. 
(c)  General vegetation characteristics. 
(d)  General soil types. 
(e)  Surveyed boundaries, prepared by a registered surveyor, of the entire tract and its relationship to adjoining properties and public right-of-way. 
(f)  Standard lot layout design. 
(g)  General street layout configuration. 
(h)  A twenty-five foot (25') undisturbed buffer area on the perimeter of the property shall be indicated, and a landscape plan as applicable. 
(i)  Existing topographic condition with contour intervals of ten feet (10') or less; areas that have slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%) shall be identified. 
(j)  Location of any streams, lakes, swamps, wetlands, and the boundary and elevation of the 100-year flood plain if applicable, shall be identified. 
(k)  Locations of parks or common open space, tree areas to be retained or added, and other open spaces. Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use or used as a planned recreational area. 
(l)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in subsection (9) herein below. 
(m)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(n)  A report setting forth the proposed development schedule, indicating sequence of development of these various sections thereof and the approximate time period required for completion of each phase. A soil erosion plan prepared by a registered engineer or soil scientist indicating all of the techniques that will be employed during construction must be provided prior to land disturbance. 
(o)  The minimum lot size for building lots in the development shall be not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and the minimum house size shall be not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet of heated area. 
(p)  A note regarding the provision for sidewalks on one side of all streets. 
(9)  Open Space. 
(a)  Definition. Open Space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the Open Space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(10)  Standards to Determine Open Space. 
(a)  The minimum restricted Open Space shall comprise at least 40% of the gross tract area. 
(b)  The following are considered Primary Conservation Areas and are required to be included within the Open Space, unless the Applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
1.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
2.  Buffer zones of at least 75 ft width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers, of the United States Federal Government, pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species, and, 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(c)  The following are considered Secondary Conservation Areas and should be included within the Open Space to the maximum extent feasible. 
1.  Important historic sites; 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
5.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
6.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(d)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected Open Space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the Open Space. 
(e)  At least 75 percent of the Open Space shall be in a contiguous tract. The Open Space should adjoin any neighboring areas of Open Space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected Open Space. 
(f)  The Open Space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the Open Space. 
(11)  Permitted Uses of Open Space. Uses of Open Space may include the following: 
(a)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(b)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(c)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(d)  Passive recreation areas; 
(e)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than 10 percent of the total Open Space and are not located within Primary Conservation Areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected Open Space; 
(f)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within Primary Conservation Areas; 
(g)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(h)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(i)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(12)  Prohibited uses of Open Space. 
(a)  Golf courses; 
(b)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(c)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and, 
(d)  Other activities as determined by the Applicant, and/or the Operations Manager's Office or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(13)  Ownership and Management of Open Space. 
(a)  Ownership of Open Space. The applicant must identify the owner of the Open Space who is responsible for maintaining the Open Space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the Open Space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  Management Plan. Applicant shall submit a Plan for Management of Open Space and Common Facilities ("Plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the Open Space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the Open Space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the Plan be approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia; and, 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the Plan. 
(c)  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the Open Space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners that make up the Homeowner's Association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(14)  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. 
(a)  The Open Space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
a.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
b.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
c.  Provided however, if the entity accepting the easement is not the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, then a third right of enforcement favoring the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall be included in the easement; 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, and the Attorney's Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the Open Space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the Applicant chooses to place on the use of the Open Space. 
(15)  Landscaping requirement: All OSRD developments shall include a minimum of two (2) trees planted in the yard of each unit. The trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper at the root ball when planted. 
(16)  All OSRD developments shall be constructed in accordance with the Development Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, but also must include the following amenities: 
(a)  Underground Utilities; 
(b)  Street Lights; 
(c)  Sidewalks on at least one side of each residential street and entrance drive as set forth herein above; 
(d)  Permanent Entrance Monuments made of all-weather material with associated landscaping; 
(e)  A minimum of a two (2) Car Garage per dwelling unit; 
(f)  Amenity package subject to approval by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(17)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirement.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
Sec. J. - LRO Low Rise Office District. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The LRO District is comprised of land for low intensity professional offices and other non-retail commercial uses such as banks, offices, and nursery schools/daycare, which are on properties within or on the edge of an area transitioning from residential to light commercial. When located on the edge of a residential node, the LRO District should provide for office uses that are low in intensity to ensure compatibility with adjacent single-family detached dwellings and otherwise to implement the stated purpose and intent of this ordinance. The LRO District is not intended for single or multi-family residential dwelling uses. 
(2)  Within the LRO District, the following uses are permitted, provided all applicable activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and there is no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc.: 
(a)  Banks, including drive-in facilities provided vehicles awaiting service are located completely off the public right-of-way. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast facilities, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(c)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship and their customarily related uses, on tracts of no less than five (5) contiguous acres provided that any building for such proposed use is located no less than 50 feet from the front and rear property lines and 25 feet from the side property lines. 
(d)  Community fairs. 
(e)  Cultural facilities, non-commercial clubs or lodges. 
(f)  Day care centers and group day care homes subject to all provisions identified within this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(g)  Designated recycling collection locations. 
(h)  Family personal care homes, family care homes, group personal care homes, battered women's shelter pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 19-13-20 et seq., subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(i)  Golf courses. 
(j)  Non-profit (seasonal use). 
(k)  Professional and business offices (real estate, doctor's office, etc.). 
(l)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until construction on the main building has been actually commenced. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  No accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be erected on or project into any required front yard setback. 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum size of 1000 square feet per acre of land. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and shall not be used for agricultural purposes or for farm animals. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. K. - O-I Office and Institutional District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. A zoning district established for activities not involving the general sale, storage, or processing of merchandise, but limited to offices, institutions and limited commercial activities. This district would normally be located in areas that are in transition from residential use to a nonresidential use, similar to the LRO district, but with slightly more intense uses. This zoning category would also serve as a buffer between residential development and commercial development. 
(2)  Permitted uses. Within the O-I District, the following uses are permitted, provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and there is no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc.: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the LRO district. 
(b)  Accessory retail sales and services. 
(c)  Ambulance service (maximum of two ambulances per location with no vehicle mechanical repair facilities or storage of disabled vehicles.) 
(d)  Congregate personal care homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(e)  Continuing care retirement communities (assisted living) subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(f)  Funeral homes, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(g)  Hospitals, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(h)  Medical clinics, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(i)  Parking lots for vehicles. 
(j)  Pharmacies, limited to 6,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(k)  Photographic studios. 
(l)  Radio and television stations. 
(m)  Research and training facilities. 
(n)  Restaurant and apothecary when located within an office building, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(o)  Rooming and boarding houses, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(p)  Schools, public and private. 
(q)  Veterinary clinic/hospital, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environment Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 2, 9-4-2018) 
Sec. L. - NB Neighborhood Business District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The NB District is established to provide locations for limited commercial uses often located on an arterial or "collector" street providing convenience goods and services for residents of the service area. Areas zoned for NB should generally be located at or near the center of the neighborhood residential areas they serve. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the NB district, the following uses are permitted provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and there is no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc.: 
(a)  All uses permitted within the LRO and O-I Districts. 
(b)  Convenience food stores with self-service fuel sales (provided that the building shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area) and that no automotive repairs will be done on site. 
(c)  Dry cleaning pick-up establishments, self-service laundry facilities. 
(d)  Neighborhood retail uses limited to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross area unless otherwise noted below; including uses such as: 
1.  Antique shop. 
2.  Agricultural produce stand. 
3.  Bakery, beverage shop, delicatessen. 
4.  Barber shop, beauty shop, hair salon, similar personal service establishments, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
5.  Bookstore (but not including adult bookstore), stationery store 
6.  Bridal shop, clothing store, shoe repair, shoe store, tailor shop, specialty shop. 
7.  Camera shop, music store. 
8.  China and pottery store, gift shop. 
9.  Dance studio. 
10.  Florist. 
11.  Hardware store (gross floor area not to exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet total with (5,000) square feet of covered outside storage. 
12.  Jewelry store. 
13.  Meat market/butcher shop, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
14.  Novelty shop, variety store, toy store. 
15.  Paint store. 
16.  Pet grooming shop. 
17.  Pharmacy/drug store, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
18.  Sporting goods store. 
19.  Indoor health/fitness centers, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
20.  Supermarket or grocery (gross floor area not to exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. 
21.  Video store. 
(e)  Non-automotive repair establishments. 
(f)  Restaurants, excluding drive-in and fast food establishments, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. M. - B-1 General Business District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The B-1 District is composed of certain lands and structures in the incorporated limits of the City of Hiram, Georgia, used primarily to provide for the retailing of goods and the furnishing of selected services to surrounding neighborhoods. Regulations within this district are intended to permit and encourage full development of necessary commercial use and at the same time protect nearby residential properties from possible adverse effects of such commercial activity. Any building or premises used for any of the permitted uses shall have not more than forty percent (40%) of the total floor area of the building or premises devoted to storage or industry purposes incidental to the primary use. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the B-1 district, the following uses are permitted provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and there is no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, equipment, accessories, etc. unless specified: 
(a)  All uses permitted within the LRO, O-I, and NB Districts with no maximum square footage limit unless noted below. 
(b)  Appliance stores selling predominantly at retail. 
(c)  Auto parts store with no on-site repair. 
(d)  Catering establishments, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(e)  Cleaning and pressing establishments for clothing; laundry pickup stations. 
(f)  Colleges, business colleges, music conservatories, dancing schools, and other similar activities offering training in specific fields. 
(g)  Commercial parking lots or garages. 
(h)  Car wash facilities 
(i)  Department stores. 
(j)  Greenhouses and nurseries of a commercial nature with outside storage limited to five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(k)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable markets, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(l)  Hotels, tourist courts, motels, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(m)  Indoor health/fitness centers, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(n)  Laboratories, medical, dental, and similar activities, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(o)  Light automotive repair establishments, emissions inspection stations. 
(p)  Music studios. 
(q)  Newspaper offices and printing establishments. 
(r)  Restaurants, cafeterias, including drive-ins and fast food; commercial recreation restaurants, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(s)  Temporary uses. 
(t)  Theaters. 
(u)  Veterinary care and associated boarding facility provided no part of any outside structure, pen, run, enclosure, or fence for animals is located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(v)  Other similar and like retail business or service establishments, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, §§ 1, 2, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. N. - PSC Planned Shopping Center District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The PSC District is established to provide locations for retail commercial and service uses which are designed and oriented to serve several neighborhoods making up a community. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should be done as planned, compact, unified centers. Projects developed within the PSC zoning district should usually occupy a quadrant of an intersection, with ingress and egress only from major streets or State Highways within areas delineated for commercial development on the Future Land Use Plan, of Paulding County, Georgia. Regulations within this district are intended to permit and encourage full development of necessary commercial use and at the same time protect nearby residential properties from possible adverse effects of such commercial activity. What distinguishes the PSC district from other commercial districts is the pre-coordinated aspect of the category to allow planned centers and discourage commercial sprawl. 
(2)  Within the PSC district, the following uses are permitted provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and there is no outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc.: 
(a)  All uses permitted within the B-1 District. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. O. - B-2 Highway Business District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The B-2 district is composed of certain lands and structures located along state and federal roads which require high visibility, locations accessible to major highways and arterials, and serve significant portions of the community. It is also the intent of this district to provide areas for business to occur which, because of their intensity, some outside storage area or hours of operation may have a significant impact on adjoining properties. Because of the nature of the businesses permitted in the B-2 district, the zoning district should be limited to property fronting on major thoroughfares and/or in large commercial nodes. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the B-2 district, the following uses are permitted provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and any outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc., is within a designated area enclosed by a six (6) foot high opaque privacy fence unless otherwise stated herein. 
(a)  All uses permitted in the "B-1" district. 
(b)  Assembly halls. 
(c)  Athletic and health clubs, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(d)  Indoor auction galleries, including furnishings and art memorabilia. 
(e)  Automobile, boat, motorcycle, all-terrain (ATV) sales and service facilities. 
(f)  Automobile, truck, and trailer lease and rental facilities (principal or accessory). 
(g)  Automotive paint and body repair shops. 
(h)  Automobile repair facilities. 
(i)  Automotive upholstery shops. 
(j)  Building lumber and supply establishments provided the entire storage area is enclosed within a solid wall or fence of at least six (6) feet in height. 
(k)  Commercial indoor recreation uses; commercial outdoor recreation uses; indoor amusement enterprises, including bowling alleys, pool halls, or the like. 
(l)  Equipment rental, sales, or service, provided the storage of equipment areas are enclosed within a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
(m)  Exterminating facilities (insect and/or rodent), subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(n)  Farm and garden supply stores; farm equipment sales and repair facilities. 
(o)  Farmers markets (fully enclosed), subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(p)  Film developing and printing facilities. 
(q)  Full service gasoline stations provided said facility shall not be located adjacent to a residential zoning district, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(r)  Manufacture of pottery or other ceramic products, using only previous pulverized clay. 
(s)  Manufacture of clocks, watches, musical instruments, and novelties. 
(t)  Printing, publishing, and lithography establishments, provided that no more than fifty (50) percent of total gross floor area will be used for storage. 
(u)  Telecommunications towers and antennas subject to requirements of adopted Ordinance. 
(v)  Temporary uses. 
(w)  Uses customarily incidental to the above uses and accessory buildings in accordance with this Ordinance, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. P. - I-1 Light Industrial District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is established to provide locations for light industrial uses which are on properties delineated within or on the perimeter of an industrial node or compatible area and have ready access to a Major Street or State Highway. The I-1 district should provide for uses that are low in intensity and scale to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties which makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors and radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. Within the I-1 district, the following uses are permitted provided all activities are carried on entirely within an enclosed building and any outdoor storage of materials, supplies, inventory, accessories, etc., is within a designated area enclosed by a six (6) foot high opaque privacy fence unless otherwise stated herein. 
(a)  Accessory retail sales and services. 
(b)  Ambulance services, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(c)  Any industry which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions and which conforms to all applicable Federal, and State of Georgia regulations and have been permitted by all appropriate Federal, and State of Georgia regulatory bodies. 
(d)  Appliance repair (major). 
(e)  Assembly halls, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(f)  Automobile, truck, and trailer lease or rental facilities (principal or accessory use); automobile and truck sales and service; automotive repair and maintenance facilities; automotive upholstery shops. 
(g)  Automotive parking lots and garages. 
(h)  Automotive paint shops and body repair shops (such uses shall not be established on lots which are either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential districts). 
(i)  Boat sales and service facilities, motorcycle, all-terrain (ATV), and three-wheel vehicle sales and service facilities. 
(j)  Building materials establishments, electrical supply establishments. 
(k)  Bus stations; bus stations for freight. 
(l)  Car washes. 
(m)  Clinics, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(n)  Clubs or lodges (non-commercial). 
(o)  Colleges and universities (private), including research and training facilities; vocational schools. 
(p)  Commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries. 
(q)  Community fairs. 
(r)  Contractors (general, heavy, special). 
(s)  Corporate or administrative offices for any permitted uses within this district. 
(t)  Dairies, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(u)  Designated recycling collection locations, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(v)  Dry cleaning plants. 
(w)  Emissions/inspection stations, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(x)  Farm and garden supply stores; farm equipment sales and repair facilities, trailer salesrooms and sales lots. 
(y)  Farmers markets (fully enclosed), subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(z)  Freight terminals; truck terminals; transportation equipment storage and maintenance facilities. 
(aa)  Heavy automotive repair services and trade shops. 
(bb)  Industrial and office parks. 
(cc)  Light manufacturing establishments. 
(dd)  Linen and diaper services. 
(ee)  Medical and dental laboratories. 
(ff)  Newspaper publishing facilities; printing, publishing, and lithography establishments. 
(gg)  Non-automotive repair service establishments. 
(hh)  Office service and supply establishments; other service establishments. 
(ii)  Plumbing and/or heating equipment dealers. 
(jj)  Poultry hatcheries. 
(kk)  Radio and television stations. 
(ll)  Radio, television, and other communication towers and antennae subject to requirements of adopted Ordinance. 
(mm)  Rail stations. 
(nn)  Recreation grounds other than tennis courts and golf courses. 
(oo)  Research and development centers; research testing laboratories. 
(pp)  Upholstery and furniture repair establishments. 
(qq)  Storage yards, including building materials, and lumber yards, saw mills, but not junk/salvage yards or automobile junk/salvage yards, provided any such use is screened from view by a solid opaque wall, or existing natural screen at least eight (8) feet in height. 
(rr)  Taxi dispatching agencies, subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing and inspection requirements, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(ss)  Temporary uses. 
(tt)  Temporary impound lot. 
(uu)  Utility facilities (private). 
(vv)  Vending machine sales, service, rental, or repair establishments. 
(ww)  Warehouse and storage facilities; wholesale sales offices; wholesale trade and distribution facilities; wholesale trade offices in conjunction with office showrooms. 
(xx)  Accessory buildings and uses located on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building and customarily incidental to the permitted use subject to the following: 
1.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until construction on the main building has been actually commenced. 
2.  All non-agricultural related accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall maintain a minimum setback of 10 feet from side or rear yard property lines. 
3.  No accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall be erected on or project into any required front yard setback 
4.  Accessory buildings shall not exceed a maximum size of 1000 square feet per acre. 
5.  Accessory buildings shall not be occupied by humans and shall not be used for agricultural purposes or for farm animals. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements.* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. Q. - I-2 Heavy Industrial District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. This district is established to provide locations for heavy industrial uses which are on properties delineated within an industrial node or compatible area and have ready access to a major street or state highway. The I-2 district provides for uses that are more intense than the light industrial district and provides those industrial operations and processes that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to health, safety or the general welfare. 
(2)  Permitted Uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in an I-1 industrial district. 
(b)  Any industrial use not listed as requiring a Special Use Permit which involves manufacturing, processing, or assembly operations or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products, or equipment, but including uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise but which may generate acceptable noise levels, smoke, gas fumes, odor, or dust, provided the same are permitted by all Federal and State of Georgia regulatory bodies. 
(c)  Fuel storage for on-site use of vehicles and equipment. 
(d)  Railroad station for freight. 
(e)  Saw mills. 
(f)  No wholesaling activity shall be permitted which processes goods handled in a manner that produces liquid or solid waste or noise, odor, fumes or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which such wholesaling activity is housed. 
(3)  Lot Size, Area, and Setback Requirements:* 
*Unless otherwise specified; also subject to approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 

 
(4)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Required buffers: See Article VI, Sec. E. of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
Sec. R. - Low density quality residential development overlay district. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the Low Density Quality Residential Development Overlay District is to promote the highest and best quality residential development while protecting the health, safety and welfare of current and future residents of the City of Hiram, Georgia, by: 
(a)  Setting high standards for quality residential design. 
(b)  Incorporating attractive and functional open space in residential development. 
(c)  Preserving natural resources and landscape features. 
(d)  Encouraging a diversity of housing types that will accommodate persons of a variety of stages of life. 
(e)  Improving traffic flow and traffic safety by providing a system of interconnected streets. 
(2)  Boundaries. 
(a)  Concept Plan. The boundaries of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District are determined by the Sweetwater Drainage Basin Boundary Map, which is hereby incorporated into and made part of this ordinance. Any parcel of land that is wholly or partly within the boundary shall be included. 
(b)  Map Amendments. No change in the boundary of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District shall be authorized, except by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, pursuant to procedures in Article XVI of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(3)  Effect of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Provisions. 
(a)  Application. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all parcels of land, or portions thereof, within the boundaries of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District that are now, or in the future, zoned R-2 with Sewer (Sewered Suburban Residential), R-5 (Duplex District), R-7 (Multi-Family Fee Simple—Non-rental—Residential) PRD (Planned Residential Development) and OSRD (Open Space Residential Development) in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia, except for those subdivisions in which more than 10 percent of the lots have been granted a building permit prior to the effective date of this Section. 
(b)  Effect. This Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia, located within this Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District. These Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District regulations shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations, the Subdivision Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, and other applicable ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(c)  All plan reviews, road and utility projects, plat approvals, and permits for parcels meeting the standards of Section R.(3)(a) and (b) shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall meet the requirements of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District applicable to the parcel as well as the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Standards applicable thereto. 
(d)  Relationship to Underlying Zoning District Standards. In any case where the standards and requirements of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District conflict with those of the base zoning district or other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the Subdivision Regulations of Paulding County, Georgia, the standards and requirements of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District shall govern. 
(4)  Design Guidelines. 
(a)  The Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Guidelines are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance and shall apply to property in the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District subject to Section R.(3)(a), (b) and (c). 
(b)  Within the designated properties in the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District, design and construction of new buildings that are not in substantial conformity with the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Guidelines is prohibited. 
(c)  In cases of a conflict between the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Guidelines and the text of this Article, the text of this Section shall govern. In cases of a conflict between the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Guidelines and other ordinances and regulations of the City of Hiram, the applicable Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Guidelines shall govern. 
(5)  Property Development Standards. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. This overlay district shall not affect the list of uses permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  The maximum density of a PRD or OSRD within the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District is 2.6 dwelling units per acre. 
(c)  Minimum Lot Sizes (PRD's only): 8,000 square feet for a maximum of 60 percent of the total number of lots, 10,000 square feet for 40 percent of the total number of lots. All lots less than 10,000 square feet must be interior lots and shall not be located along any perimeter boundary of the proposed development. 
(d)  Open Space. (PRD's only) 
1.  Developments containing more than 50 lots shall set aside a minimum of 10 percent of the total gross acreage of the site as permanently protected open space. 
2.  Fifty percent (50%) of the required open space may include floodplain. Site areas used for amenities such as swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse and other similar facilities are encouraged, but may not be counted in the required open space. 
3.  Open space areas shall be held in common ownership and shall conform to the requirements as follows: 
a.  Each open space area must comprise an area of least 10,000 square feet, with a minimum dimension of 15 ft. of width or depth. 
b.  At least one-half of required common open space shall be located in a contiguous area. 
c.  No more than 10 percent of required open space may be areas of impervious surface. 
d.  A system of pedestrian pathways consisting of sidewalks or trails shall be provided linking each lot containing one or more dwelling units to at least one open space area. 
e.  Within the required open space, provide a minimum 14-ft.-wide easement dedicated to the City of Hiram, Georgia, in the approximate locations designated as Greenway Corridors. The easement shall be outside the required undisturbed stream buffer and shall be improved with a multi-use trail meeting the standards of Section (7)(a) of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Dimensional standards for single-family, detached dwellings in PRD's and OSRD's. 
1.  Front yard setbacks for single-family detached dwellings: Minimum 25 ft. from right-of-way line. 
2.  Building height: maximum 2 stories above front yard grade. 
3.  Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet. 
4.  House Sizes: PRD's—80% of total dwellings must be 2,400 square feet or larger with a minimum heated area of 2,000 square feet. 
5.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet (PRD's) 80 feet (OSRD's) 
(f)  Building Design. All dwelling units including attached that are subject to the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District shall be designed with traditional architectural design elements. Each dwelling unit that is part of a Residential Development subject to the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District must utilize at least six of the following architectural design features: 
1.  Dormers. 
2.  Bay or bow windows. 
3.  Garage setback at least 20 ft. behind the facade of the principal structure. 
4.  Covered porch entry (covered front porch). 
5.  Transoms and sidelights. 
6.  Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 2 ft.). 
7.  A roof with a pitch greater than 8:12 and a minimum overhang of 12 inches on all sides. 
8.  Columns, pillars, or posts on facade. 
9.  Shutters and other window decorations. 
10.  Arched or Palladian windows. 
11.  Hip and gable roof lines. 
12.  Rock, brick, marble or other material as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(g)  Building materials. Dwellings constructed in each zoning district as established by Sec. R, 3a) shall be subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Building materials for exterior walls are limited to the following: brick, stone, cement board siding, and glass (vinyl components—not horizontal siding) are permitted for aesthetic purposes, upon approval by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
2.  Building materials for roofs may be one of the following: 
a.  Architecturally textured composition shingles. 
b.  Slate shingles. 
c.  Standing seam metal roof approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
3.  Flat roofs (pitch less than 1:12) shall not be permitted on any building roof consisting of more than 200 sq. ft. in area. 
(h)  Site Development Standards. 
1.  Landscaping of lots. 
a.  A minimum of 100 percent of the areas of front, side, and rear yards shall be grass sod; excluding natural and landscaped areas. 
b.  A single species of trees may be used for no more than 25 percent of the total number of new trees planted in a development. 
c.  Two (2) trees must be planted in the front yard of each dwelling unit. (Existing trees may be considered adequate by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager.) 
2.  Buffers: 
a.  A minimum 25-foot buffer must be provided along the perimeter of any subdivision development or else otherwise approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for necessary intrusions such as required infrastructure, storm water management and/or future street connectivity points. The buffer shall conform to requirements of Article VI, Section E. of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
b.  A 20 ft. wide, "no access" easement shall be required along the right of way of arterial and collector streets. The easement shall provide for utilities, slopes and drainage and shall be continuous except for the intersection with another public street. The "no access" easement shall contain a minimum 10 ft. deep landscape strip along the edge of the easement that is abutting residential lots. The landscape strip shall be continuous except for 35 ft. wide clear zones adjacent to the right of way of each intersecting street in order to maintain visibility at intersections. 
3.  Environmental Standards. 
a.  Retain natural vegetation and topography to the maximum extent feasible. 
b.  Maximum of 40 contiguous acres may be mass graded in any single phase. 
4.  Sidewalks. A minimum 4-ft. wide sidewalk is required on both sides of all local streets. 
5.  Landscape strips. 
a.  A minimum 2-ft. wide landscape strip is required adjacent to the curb on both sides of local streets. 
b.  Landscape strips along local streets shall be planted with sod and may include a variety of low, hardy shrubbery and flowering plants with mulched beds. Areas of exposed earth shall not be allowed. Landscaping shall be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
c.  All landscape materials required by this ordinance shall be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association. Such maintenance shall keep landscape materials healthy, neat, and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. 
(6)  Program for Unified Ownership and Control. 
(a)  A development within the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District shall provide evidence of the unified control of the entire project. During the development process, more than one builder may participate in the development of the approved plan so long as each parcel of land remains subject to all of the terms and conditions of the plat approved by the Department of the Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for the property as a whole. 
(b)  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection of Common Areas and Open Space. 
1.  The common areas and open space shall be protected in perpetuity from further development by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. If the common areas are to be controlled by an association of property owners, then membership in such association shall be mandatory for all property owners within the project. 
2.  The instrument protecting the common areas from further development shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement (excluding recreation areas and amenities) in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented, non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance; if the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Hiram, Georgia, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall be included in the easement; or 
b.  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c) as hereinafter may be amended, a permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Attorney of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
3.  The instrument for permanent protection shall incorporate restrictions on the use of the open space contained in this Article, as well as any further restrictions, as approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(7)  Public Improvements Standards. 
(a)  Multi-use Trail. Multi-use trails shall be incorporated within the overall development to provide connectivity to amenities, open space areas and other adjacent developments. The trails are also intended for recreation use. Trails may be located in floodplain areas. 
1.  Maximum grade of 6 percent. 
2.  Minimum right-of-way width: 14 ft. 
3.  Minimum paved width of travel way: 10 ft. (travel way may be constructed with organic pervious material with approval of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager.) 
4.  Shoulder width variable, based on topography. 
5.  5-ft. flare at street intersections, with ramp to street and bollards spaced 7 ft. apart to block motorized traffic, except golf carts. 
(b)  Street Network Standards. 
1.  An interconnected grid pattern is encouraged. 
2.  If a tract of land in the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District abuts another undeveloped parcel along a common boundary of 600 ft. or more (other than where the common property line falls along a stream) then the PRD parcel shall provide a minimum 50 ft. wide right of way for a future street connection for every 600 feet of the common boundary. 
3.  If a new residential development is proposed, it shall incorporate and continue all stub streets or future street connections provided on abutting residential properties. 
(c)  Underground Utilities. For all new construction and redevelopment, utilities along public streets must be placed underground. The Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, may approve an exception, if subsurface rock or other unique hardship makes such installation infeasible. 
(8)  Procedures 
(a)  Traffic Study. A Traffic Impact Study is required for developments with more than 200 dwelling units. 
(b)  Review of Building Plans. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any occupied structure to be located within a development that is subject to this section, the builder shall provide architectural plans and elevations at a scale no smaller than 1/8 in. = 1 ft. that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Article. The Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall have the authority to review and approve building plans for conformity with the requirements of this section and the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District Design Guidelines, Building Codes, and other requirements of the Development Code of Regulations, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(9)  Exceptions. Residential Developments of three lots or less are not subject to the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District. 
(10)  Effective Date. This Section shall become effective upon the date of its adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
RESERVED 
This portion of the Low Density Quality Residential Overlay District is reserved for photographic and/or other visual aids or schematics, which are intended to demonstrate Overlay designs and standards. 
Sec. S. - Low Density Quality Residential Development District. 
(1)  Purpose and Intent. The Low Density Quality Residential Development District is considered by the City of Hiram, Georgia, to be the highest and best residential zoning category. The Low Density Quality Residential Development District will promote developments of the highest residential quality in the City of Hiram, Georgia. The purpose and intent of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District is to promote the highest and best quality residential development while protecting the health, safety and welfare of current and future residents of the City of Hiram, Georgia, by: 
(a)  Setting high standards for quality residential design. 
(b)  Incorporating attractive and functional open space in residential development. 
(c)  Preserving natural resources and landscape features. 
(d)  Encouraging a diversity of housing types that will accommodate persons of a variety of stages of life. 
(e)  Improving traffic flow and traffic safety by providing a system of interconnected streets as well as providing vehicle and/or intermodal connectivity to adjoining parcels. 
(2)  Effect of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District Provisions. 
(a)  Application. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all parcels of land, or portions thereof, within the boundaries of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District. 
(b)  All plan reviews, road and utility projects, plat approvals, and permits for parcels meeting the standards of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District. 
(3)  Design Guidelines. 
(a)  The Low Density Quality Residential Development District Design Guidelines are hereby adopted and made part of this Ordinance and shall apply to property in the Low Density Quality Residential Development District subject to Section S. (3) (b). 
(b)  Within the designated properties in the Low Density Quality Residential Development District, design and construction of new buildings that are not in substantial conformity with the Low Density Quality Residential Development District Guidelines is prohibited. 
(4)  Property Development Standards. 
(a)  Permitted Uses. The Low Density Quality Residential Development District is a planned district that permits uses that are residential in character and shall consist of single-family detached dwelling units with customary home occupations and appropriate accessory uses and structures, and limited recreational uses, as approved by the governing authority. Churches, schools, and limited day-care facilities planned as part of the Low Density Quality Residential Development, at its application inception, are also allowed; provided however, that such uses, if introduced as a part of the Low Density Quality Residential Development after the Low Density Quality Residential Development has been reviewed and approved by the governing authority, shall require review and approval by the governing authority through a subsequent amended application process. 
(b)  Minimum site area. The minimum site area shall be restricted to no less that thirty-five (35) contiguous acres developed under one coordinated plan. For an adjoining property to be included in an overall development within a Low Density Quality Residential Development District there must be a minimum of 100 feet of a shared boundary line (excluding right-of-ways). 
(c)  The maximum density of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District is 2.5 dwelling units per acre. 
(d)  Minimum Lot Sizes: 12,000 square feet. 
(e)  Open Space. 
1.  Developments containing more than 50 lots shall set aside a minimum of 10 percent of the total gross acreage of the site as permanently protected open space. 
2.  No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required open space may include floodplains (including nature areas, walkways, pathways and trails within floodplains). Site areas used for amenities such as swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse and other similar facilities are required and may not be counted in the required open space. Amenities including sports fields and other passive recreation facilities with pervious surfaces may be located within open space areas or counted toward the required open space. 
3.  Open space areas shall be held in common ownership and shall conform to the requirements as follows: 
a.  Each open space area must comprise an area of least 10,000 square feet with a minimum dimension of 15 ft. of width or depth. 
b.  At least one-half of required common open space shall be located in a contiguous area. 
c.  No more than 10 percent of required open space may be areas of impervious surface. 
d.  A system of pedestrian pathways consisting of sidewalks or trails shall be provided linking each lot containing one or more dwelling units to at least one open space area. 
(f)  Dimensional standards for single-family, detached dwellings in the Low Density Quality Residential Development District. 
1.  Front yard setbacks for single-family detached dwellings: Minimum 25 ft. from right-of-way line. (Dwellings may be allowed to be a minimum of 10 ft. from the right-of-way with the following two requirements. (1) Attached or detached garages or carports must be setback a minimum of 25 ft. from right-of-way line or (2) rear entrance parking is planned and developed through a rear drive or alley system that has been approved by the Department of Transportation, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
2.  Building height: maximum 3 stories above front yard grade. (Excludes windowed basements due to topography). Additional stories may be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, upon submission of a unified building design plan for a development. 
3.  Minimum spacing between buildings: 15 feet. 
4.  House Sizes: Dwellings must be 2,400 square feet or larger with a minimum heated area of 2,000 square feet. 
5.  Minimum two (2) car garage per dwelling unit. 
6.  Minimum lot width: 80 feet 
(g)  Building Design. All dwelling units including attached garages or carports that are subject to the Low Density Quality Residential Development District shall be designed with traditional architectural design elements. Each dwelling unit that is part of a Residential Development subject to the Low Density Quality Residential Development District must utilize at least (five) of the following architectural design features: 
1.  Dormers. 
2.  Bay or bow windows. 
3.  Garage setback at least 2 ft. behind the facade of the principal structure. 
4.  Covered porch entry (covered front porch). 
5.  Transoms or sidelights. 
6.  Off-sets on building face or roof (minimum 2 ft.). 
7.  A roof with a pitch greater than 8:12 and a minimum overhang of 12 inches on all sides. 
8.  Columns, pillars, or posts on facade. 
9.  Arched or Palladian windows. 
10.  Hip or gable roof lines. 
11.  Front stoops and/or step made of rock, brick, marble or other material as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(h)  Building materials. Dwellings constructed in the Low Density Quality Residential Development District shall be subject to the following requirements. 
1.  Building materials for exterior walls are limited to the following: brick, stone, cement board siding, and glass. Vinyl components—not horizontal siding may be permitted for aesthetic purposes with approval from the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
2.  Building materials for roofs may be one of the following: 
a.  Architecturally textured composition shingles. 
b.  Slate shingles. 
c.  Standing seam metal roof approved by the Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
3.  Flat roofs (pitch less than 1:12) shall not be permitted on any building roof consisting of more than 200 sq. ft. in area. 
(i)  Site Development Standards. 
1.  Landscaping of lots. 
a.  A minimum of 100 percent of the areas of front, side, and rear yards shall be grass sod; excluding natural and landscaped areas. 
b.  A single species of trees may be used for no more than 25 percent of the total number of new trees planted in a development. 
c.  Two (2) trees must be planted in the front yard of each dwelling unit. (Trees must be native to this region and be a minimum of 6 feet in height.) (Existing trees may be considered adequate, based on the approval of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager.) 
d.  Entrance signs shall not be located on residential lots without a permanent sign easement that must be recorded with the Superior Court Clerk, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(j)  Buffers: 
1.  A minimum 25-foot undisturbed or planted buffer must be provided along the perimeter of any subdivision development or else otherwise approved by the Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for necessary intrusions such as required infrastructure, storm water management and/or future street connectivity points. The buffer shall conform to requirements of Article VI, Section E. of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
2.  A 20 ft. wide, "no access" easement shall be required along the right of way of arterial and collector streets. (State or City Roads, Parkways, Boulevards excluding subdivision streets) The easement shall provide for utilities, slopes and drainage and shall be continuous except for the intersection with another public street. The "no access" easement shall contain a minimum 10 ft. deep landscape strip along the edge of the easement that is abutting residential lots. The landscape strip shall be continuous except for 35 ft. wide clear zones adjacent to the right of way of each intersecting street in order to maintain visibility at intersections. 
(k)  Environmental Standards. 
1.  Retain natural vegetation and topography to the maximum extent feasible. 
2.  A maximum of 35 acres exposed, excluding infrastructure (rough grading streets, storm water management, sanitary sewer, water lines and required the Department of Transportation, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager). 
(l)  Sidewalks and amenities. A minimum 4-ft. wide sidewalk is required on both sides of all local streets. Amenities (passive and/or active recreation (such as swimming pool, tennis courts, clubhouse and other similar facilities) are required and subject to approval by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, through the plan review process. 
(m)  Landscape strips. 
1.  A minimum 2-ft. wide landscape strip is required adjacent to the curb on both sides of local streets. 
2.  Landscape strips along local streets shall be planted with sod and may include a variety of low, hardy shrubbery and flowering plants with mulched beds. Areas of exposed earth shall not be allowed. Landscaping shall be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
a.  All landscape materials required by this ordinance shall be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association. Such maintenance shall keep landscape materials healthy, neat, and orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. 
(5)  Program for Unified Ownership and Control. 
(a)  A development within the Low Density Quality Residential Development District shall provide evidence of the unified control of the entire project. During the development process, more than one builder may participate in the development of the approved plan so long as each parcel of land remains subject to all of the terms and conditions of the plat approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for the property as a whole. 
(b)  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection of Common Areas and Open Space. 
1.  The common areas and open space shall be protected in perpetuity from further development by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. If the common areas are to be controlled by an association of property owners, then membership in such association shall be mandatory for all property owners within the project. 
2.  The instrument protecting the common areas from further development shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement (excluding recreation areas and amenities) in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented, non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance; if the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Hiram, Georgia, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall be included in the easement; or 
b.  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c) as hereinafter may be amended, a permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
3.  The instrument for permanent protection shall incorporate restrictions on the use of the open space contained in this Article, as well as any further restrictions, as approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(6)  Public Improvements Standards. 
(a)  Street Network Standards. 
1.  An interconnected grid pattern is encouraged. 
2.  If a tract of land in the Low Density Quality Residential Development District abuts another undeveloped parcel along a common boundary of 1,000 feet or more (other than where the common property line falls along a stream) then the development shall provide a minimum 50 ft. wide right of way for a future street connection for every 1,000 feet of the common boundary. 
3.  If a new residential development is proposed, it shall incorporate and continue all stub streets or future street connections provided on abutting residential properties. 
(b)  Underground Utilities. For all new construction and redevelopment, utilities along public streets must be placed underground. Underground utility service units (boxes) must be landscaped. The Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, may approve an exception, if subsurface rock or other unique hardship makes such installation infeasible. Developer would be required to submit evidence including borings, soil maps/analysis or other information requested by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(7)  Procedures. 
(a)  Traffic Study. A Traffic Impact Study is required for developments with more than 400 dwelling units. 
(b)  Review of Building Plans. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any occupied structure to be located within a development that is subject to this section, the builder shall provide architectural plans and elevations at a scale no smaller than 1/8 in. = 1 ft. that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Article. The Director of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall have the authority to review and approve building plans for conformity with the requirements of this section and the Low Density Quality Residential Development District Design Guidelines, Building Codes, and other requirements of the Development Code of Regulations, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(8)  Effective Date. This Section shall become effective upon the date of its adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
RESERVED 
This portion of the Low Density Quality Residential Development District is reserved for photographic and/or other visual aids or schematics, which are intended to demonstrate Overlay designs and standards. 
ARTICLE IX. - LAND USE PERMITS 
A Land Use Permit is hereby defined and required for those uses which can ordinarily be carried on out of a residence and lot or other structure without having any significant effect on the neighborhood or area from which such land use is carried on. For example: concrete figurine sales where a single operator is involved; sale of crafts or other items made by the resident; other like and similar uses of a limited nature which are carried on by those who regularly occupy the household and which are not a permissible use as a home occupation. 

Sec. A. - Granting of land use permits. 
(1)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, is hereby authorized to grant land use permits for businesses compatible with the neighborhood, from which such business or occupation is operated and where no nuisance, as defined in Georgia law, or other significant adverse effect would result to the area or district zoned. Also, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may grant land use permits in commercial areas for structures to be used for dwelling purposes by the proprietor, or manager of the commercial use. 
Sec. B. - Application procedures and considerations. 
(1)  An application for a Land Use Permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding Council, Georgia, as provided for in this Ordinance, and shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning. Public hearings will be held in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. All applications shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(2)  In no event shall the governing authority grant a land use permit for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) months except on re-application, re-advertisement, and public hearing. 
(3)  The applicant or operator must reside full time at the residence where the land use permit is granted if the property is located in a platted subdivision. 
(4)  If the application is for use of a portion of a business for residential use, the proprietor or landlord must reside thereon. 
(5)  The governing authority shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a land use permit: 
(a)  Safety, health, welfare and moral concerns involving the surrounding neighborhood; 
(b)  Parking and traffic considerations; 
(c)  Number of non-related employees; 
(d)  Number of commercial and business deliveries; 
(e)  The impact of the business on the surrounding neighborhood as it relates to increased noise, traffic, pollution, safety, and general welfare of the area; 
(f)  Whether the proposed business is compatible with existing conditions in the neighborhood; 
(g)  The hours of operation; 
(h)  Existing business uses in the vicinity; 
(i)  Circumstances surrounding neighborhood complaints; 
(j)  Type of use and intensity of proposed business; and 
(k)  Location of use within the neighborhood. 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
Within the incorporated areas of the City of Hiram, Georgia, no building, premises, or land shall be used for any of the following uses which may cause objectionable conditions including, but not limited to, noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust, fire hazards, or other objectionable conditions unless the proposed location, construction, and operation of said use shall be found to be not unduly injurious to surrounding developments or to the community in general based upon the standards and criteria set forth in this ordinance, after a study by the Planning Commission of Paulding County, Georgia, and approval from the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. In addition to the standards and criteria, all requests for any uses shown as objectionable uses herein shall obtain a favorable report from the Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia that the proposed use will be safe and a recommendation from the Health Department, of Paulding County, Georgia that the proposed use is acceptable according to Health Department Guidelines, of the State of Georgia. 
The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall give careful consideration to the reasonably foreseeable negative effects upon and risks to the environment and public health and safety for a use or facility that is, or would be, located within a significant groundwater recharge area, wetland, or water supply watershed. The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may request such studies and investigations at the cost of the applicant, as the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may deem necessary to make such determination. Furthermore, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may, upon approval of a special use permit, require other such terms and conditions as deemed necessary to protect the environment, public health, safety and welfare. 

Sec. A. - Requirement of special use permit for certain activities, applications; evaluation; issuance. 
(1)  Uses controlled in this Article are prohibited unless an approval for a Special Use Permit has been granted by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, after a recommendation by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the required advertised public hearing before the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, based on requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2)  An application for a Special Use Permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, as provided for in this Ordinance, and shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning. Public hearings will be held in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. All requests shall be accompanied by the application fee as established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia, as well as, plats and all data specified by the Special Use Permit application form. 
(3)  The Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may grant Special Use Permits for any period of time at their discretion. 
(4)  In addition to general zoning district requirements, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a Special Use Permit: 
(a)  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the neighborhood or an area in which the proposed use will be located. 
(b)  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the area. 
(c)  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-1-2. 
(d)  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
(e)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
(f)  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
(g)  Whether or not special or unique conditions overcome the governing authority's general presumption that residential neighborhoods should not allow non-compatible business uses. 
(h)  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
(i)  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries. 
(j)  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to insure appropriate transition. 
(k)  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare, or moral concerns of the surrounding area will be adversely affected. 
(l)  Whether or not the use shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, of Paulding County, Georgia, for the area. 
(m)  Whether or not the proposed use is able to be served by adequate public utilities. 
(n)  Whether or not adequate traffic routes and entrances must be established, including consideration of the deterioration of the existing roadway, expenditure of public funds to maintain roadways, adequacy and safety of road intersections, road widths on roads within and leading to the property, pavement conditions (material, thickness, age, etc.) width and length of property boundaries at road access areas and type of vehicles that may be used at the property. 
(5)  Each Special Use Permit shall contain such terms and conditions as are deemed necessary by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to protect the environment, public health, and safety, and welfare. The Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may require such testing and construction supervision as it deems necessary to protect the environment and public health and safety. 
Sec. B. - Uses which require a special use permit. 
The following are classified as uses which require a Special Use Permit under the zoning category as stated herein: 
(1)  Special Use Permits Within Any Zoning District. Unless already specified as a permitted use within a particular district, the following uses may be permitted in any zoning district with a special use permit approved in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use should not adversely affect health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Cemeteries. 
(b)  Churches on tracts less than five (5) contiguous acres and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings provided that such structures shall be set back fifty (50) feet from the front and rear property lines and twenty-five (25) feet from the side property lines. 
(c)  Breeding, boarding kennels, commercial and/or private kennels, provided all outdoor runs, fences, and related building/structures shall be located no less than two hundred (200) feet from the side and rear property lines and three hundred (300) feet from the front property line. 
(d)  Landscaping nurseries (wholesale), green houses (wholesale), provided structures shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to the side and rear property lines and one hundred (100) feet to the front property line. 
(e)  Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, swimming pools, gardens, and similar public recreational facilities provided all buildings for such proposed use are located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(f)  Raising of exotic and/or wild animals provided structures for animals shall be located no less than two hundred (200) feet from the side and rear property lines and three hundred (300) feet from the front property line. 
(g)  Telecommunication towers in accordance with Article V(b) of this Zoning Ordinance for Tele-communication Antennae and Towers, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(h)  Sand dredging subject to applicable permits from the State of Georgia, City of Hiram, Georgia, and Paulding County, Georgia. 
(i)  Family Personal Care Home, Group Home, Group Personal Care Home, and Congregate Personal Care Home (minimum 3 acre lot size), subject to applicable Federal, State of Georgia, Paulding County, Georgia, and/or City of Hiram, Georgia, licensing, including Fire Marshal, of the State of Georgia, and/or Fire Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, approval. 
(j)  Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds subject to the following: 
1.  General requirements. A recreational vehicle park or campground shall meet the following general requirements: 
a.  It shall be primarily for recreational use by persons with transportable recreational housing, with appropriate accessory uses and structures. 
b.  The land on which it is developed shall be under unified control and shall be planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation or programmed series of development operations for recreational vehicles and related uses and facilities. Subsequent subdivision of lots or conveyance of sites to individual owners by any means is prohibited. 
c.  The principal and accessory uses and structures shall be substantially related to the character of the development in the context of the district of which it is a part. 
d.  The park shall be developed according to comprehensive and detailed plans that include streets, utilities, lots, and building sites. 
e.  The park shall have a program for provision, maintenance, and operation of all areas, improvements, and facilities for the common use of all or some of the occupants of the park, but will not be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense. 
f.  A one hundred (100) foot buffer shall be maintained along the perimeter of the park. 
g.  Continuous parking for RV's and tent sites shall be restricted to a period of no more than fourteen days. 
h.  All recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds shall meet the requirements of the "Rules of Department of Human Resources Tourist Accommodations," of the State of Georgia, as now, or hereafter amended. 
2.  Allowable uses. The allowable uses in a recreational vehicle park include the following: 
a.  Recreational vehicles. 
b.  Tent camping. 
c.  Convenience establishments for the sale or rental of supplies or for provision of services, for the satisfaction of daily or frequent needs of campers, within the park may be permitted. These establishments may provide groceries, ice, sundries, bait, fishing equipment, self-service laundry equipment, bottled gas, and other similar items needed by users of the park. These establishments shall be designed to serve only the needs of the campers within the park and shall not, including their parking areas, occupy more than five percent (5%) of the area of the park, and shall not be located as to attract patronage from outside the grounds, nor have the adverse effects on surrounding land uses. 
3.  Site design requirements. The following site design requirements shall be met: 
a.  The minimum land area for a recreational vehicle park shall be eight (8) acres. 
b.  The maximum density for a recreational vehicle park shall be six (6) spaces per gross acre. Storage spaces shall be included in the density calculation. 
c.  Individual spaces shall take access to internal streets and shall not take direct access to adjoining public rights-of-way. 
d.  Access to the recreational vehicle park shall be from a collector or arterial roadway. 
e.  Internal streets (minimum 20 feet in accordance with the "Rules of Department of Human Resources Tourist Accommodations," of the State of Georgia) shall provide safe and convenient access to spaces and appropriate park facilities. Alignment and gradient shall be property adapted to topography. Construction and maintenance shall provide a well-drained surface that is of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic. 
f.  Camping spaces shall be so located in relation to internal streets as to provide for convenient vehicular ingress and egress if the space is intended for use by wheeled units. Where back-in or back-out spaces are used, appropriate maneuvering rooms shall be provided in the adjacent internal street and within the space. 
g.  Where spaces are to be used exclusively for erection of tents on the ground, provision for vehicular access onto such spaces shall not be required, but parking areas shall be located within one hundred (100) feet, except in circumstances in which providing such vehicular accessibility would result in excessive destruction of trees or other vegetation, or where it would be impractical to provide such parking areas within such distances for particularly desirable campsites. 
h.  Spaces shall be so related to pedestrian ways and principal destinations within the park as to provide for convenient pedestrian access to such destinations by the pedestrian systems. 
i.  No minimum dimensions are specified for spaces, but each shall provide the clearances specified herein, and the boundaries of each space shall be clearly indicated. 
j.  RV sites shall be at least twenty (20) feet apart, edge to edge, and the center of all camping units shall be at least thirty (30) feet from the edge of the campground road. 
k.  In relation to toilet, washroom, and bath facilities, spaces for RV units shall be located in accordance with the "Rules of Department of Human Resources Tourist Accommodations," of the State of Georgia. 
4.  All proposed and required water sources and sanitary facilities serving parks for recreational vehicles shall conform to the requirements of the Department of Human Resources, of the State of Georgia, Public Health Division, and the Department of Natural Resources Water Supply Section, of the State of Georgia, as appropriate. 
a.  Water Supply: Each campground shall have access to a source of potable water approved by the applicable health authority. It is preferable to provide one (1) water outlet per camping unit; however, a minimum of one (1) outlet for every two (2) units shall be provided with two (2) hose bibs equipped with vacuum breakers. Each unit shall have access to water within fifty (50) feet of and RV pad. All water taps or outlets serving campsites shall be of a type compatible with garden hoses connections. The location of water outlets and electrical outlets shall be in accordance with applicable standards specified by the state electrical codes. 
b.  Sewage Disposal: Sewage disposal shall be in accordance with the "Rules of the Department of Human Resources Tourist Accommodations," of the State of Georgia. 
c.  Solid Waste Disposal: All parks shall provide fly-proof, watertight, rodent-proof containers for the disposal of refuse. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. Refuse for camping areas shall be collected at least once a week. 
5.  Any other requirements as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, as part of the Special Use Permit public hearing process. 
(2)  Special Use Permits Within Any A-1, R-2, Zoning District. The following uses may be permitted in an A-1, R-2, zoning district with a special use permit approval in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use will not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Guest house as accessory building provided it is limited to one (1) such structure per lot and will not include manufactured, mobile or modular structures. The minimum lot size requirement is two (2) acres total for the primary residence and the guest house. The guest house is subject to the following, at minimum: 
1.  It shall have a minimum heated floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet. 
2.  It shall have a septic system approval by the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 
3.  It shall be used by a bona fide non-paying guest or relative of the occupants of the principal residence, and shall not be rented or leased. 
4.  It shall not be sold as a separate unit from the principal residence. 
5.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance. 
6.  All applicable building, electrical, HVAC, plumbing, and septic permits shall be obtained after approval of the Special Use Permit. 
(3)  Special Use Permits Within Any R-4 or O-I Zoning District. The following use may be permitted in an R-4 or O-I zoning district with a special use permit approval in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use will not adversely affect health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Group home, Congregate Group Home. 
(b)  Homeless shelter. 
(4)  Special Use Permits Within Any Non-Residential Zoning District. The following uses may be permitted in any non-residential zoning district with a special use permit approval in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use should not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Race tracks (including drag strips). 
(b)  Rifle, pistol, and skeet ranges. 
(c)  Heliports. 
(5)  Special Use Permits Within a B-2 Highway Business Zoning District. The following uses may be permitted in a B-2 Highway Business zoning district with a special use permit approval in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use should not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments per adopted Adult Entertainment Ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  Automobile and cattle auctions. 
(c)  Bus stations. 
(d)  Contractor's offices with outdoor storage of equipment or materials, provided the storage of equipment areas are enclosed with a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
(e)  Drive-in theaters, provided that the screen is so arranged that no portion of the projection surface is visible from public roads or highways. 
(f)  Extended Stay Hotel/Motel. 
(g)  Manufactured housing and truck sales and service facilities. 
(h)  Nightclubs. 
(i)  Outdoor amusement enterprises. 
(j)  Pawn shops, subject to applicable permitting. 
(k)  Self-storage (mini-warehouse) facilities with accompanying residence manager living quarters. 
(l)  Temporary impound lot. 
(6)  Special Use Permits Within an I-2 Heavy Industrial Zoning District. The following uses may be permitted in an I-2 Heavy Industrial zoning district with a special use permit approval in accordance with this section where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question; provided that the said use should not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and provided further that all applicable requirements of these zoning regulations shall be complied with: 
(a)  Acid manufacture; hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfuric and like acids. 
(b)  Airports and landing fields. 
(c)  Animal or food processing plants, including, but not limited to poultry, veal or beef. 
(d)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; or asphalt plant. 
(e)  Cement, cement products, concrete, clay products, lime, gypsum, brick, tile, or plaster manufacture. 
(f)  Chemical and pharmaceutical products manufacture or storage in bulk. 
(g)  Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, animal refuse, grain, tar and wood. 
(h)  Explosives, including but not limited to fireworks, manufacture or storage in bulk. 
(i)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(j)  Gas manufacture or storage in bulk, including but not limited to propane, chlorine or other toxic, noxious, or pyrophoric gases. 
(k)  Glue or gelatin manufacture. 
(l)  Grain elevators or commercial feed mills. 
(m)  Incinerators, commercial, including but not limited to those handling garbage and medical waste. 
(n)  Landfills, including but not limited to sanitary landfills. 
(o)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture. 
(p)  Mineral/rock extraction, including but not limited to quarrying stone, crushing and mining. 
(q)  Paper and pulp mills. 
(r)  Petroleum or its related products manufacture, storage in bulk or wholesaling; refining. 
(s)  Refining or manufacture of tallow, grease or lard from or of animal fat. 
(t)  Rendering plants. 
(u)  Rock or gravel distribution, storage or excavation. 
(v)  Slaughter of animals, commercial. 
(w)  Stock yards for animals or other uses; livestock sales pavilions. 
(x)  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. 
(y)  Other similar uses, due to their impact on air and water quality, use of hazardous materials, tendency to emit excessive levels of noise, vibration, odor, smoke, particulate matter, fumes, and/or radiation, or due to other reasons, are deemed by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, subject to appeal to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to be an impact to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(7)  The following uses may be permitted in an I-2 zoning district with a Special Use Permit approved by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, subject to the additional requirements specified below. 
(a)  Automobile salvage yard or parts yard. 
(b)  Junk yard, salvage yard, used metal storage yard; used building material salvage or storage yard, equipment salvage or storage yard, and metal processing (new or used). 
(c)  Steel mill; foundry or forging of iron, steel, brass, copper and other metals; smelting of metal ores, including but not limited to tin, copper, zinc or iron; metal processing of any kind, new or used. 
(d)  Any other operation which, in the opinion of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, is similar in operation or appearance to the above listed uses. 
(e)  All uses specified in (a) through (d) above shall be conducted in strict compliance with the following regulations: 
1.  The minimum land area shall be ten (10) acres; provided that the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may authorize less area if all other provisions of this section and this Zoning Ordinance are observed and a smaller area would best serve the public interest. 
2.  The uses shall be completely enclosed, and not visible from a public street, by a solid fence of wood or masonry wall, with necessary gates for ingress and egress, and such fencing/wall shall be not less than eight (8) feet in height measured from the grade at the structure; provided that a steel mesh fence may be substituted for a solid fence on the rear of the use and up to the rear three-fourths (¾) of the side of the use when the use abuts either an industrial park development, any class of business district, or undeveloped suburban or urban fringe residential district, provided that at any time residential development occurs within one hundred (100) feet of said use, a solid fence as provided in this section shall be installed by the operator of the Special Use Permit. Provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting any portion of the use to be seen from a public street or road. Fencing and access gates shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way along public streets. 
3.  Buffers shall be provided as required in Article VI, Sec. E, outside the fence or wall. 
4.  All uses shall be located on well drained areas; provided that no drainage channel or watercourse shall traverse storage and dismantling operations areas; provided further that all drainage channels terminating in public watercourses or public waters shall be constructed in accordance to the specifications provided by the Department of Community Development, Engineering Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia, and other agencies as required. Furthermore, all uses involving dismantling or storage of any products subject to the emission of petroleum products, or other poisonous or obnoxious substance, onto the ground, or other product which may in any manner encourage the harboring or collecting of obnoxious or poisonous wastes or vermin, shall be prohibited within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of any watercourse or tributary, or as otherwise more stringently regulated by applicable State of Georgia, or Federal regulations. 
5.  Non-conformance. For purposes of this section there shall be three (3) classifications of non-conformance: (a) a non-conforming operation in a non-conforming location (i.e., an operation which does not follow the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, and which is not a permitted use in the zoning district where located; (b) a conforming operation in a non-conforming location (i.e., same as (a) above except the operation of said yard is in conformance with said regulations); (c) a non-conforming operation in a conforming location (i.e., a permitted use within the district where situated, but not operating in accordance with the provisions of said regulations). 
a.  Non-conforming operation in non-conforming location. The amortization period for any establishment covered by this Ordinance which is non-conforming both in operation and location is three (3) years from the date of passage of this Ordinance; the owners or operators shall utilize this three (3) year period to conform to these regulations or remove said operations from said district; provided that whenever an owner or representative of a non-conforming use in a zoning district applies for and is granted favorable zoning (I-2 with Special Use Permit), such person shall have a period not to exceed three (3) months to bring the operation or establishment into complete conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
b.  Conforming operating in non-conforming location. The amortization period for any establishment covered by this section which conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance, but is not a permitted use within the district in which said operation or establishment is situated, is three (3) years from the date of passage of this amendment; provided, however, whenever an owner or representative of said conforming use in a non-conforming location applies for and is granted favorable zoning (I-2 with Special Use Permit), such person shall have a period not to exceed three (3) months after said rezoning becomes effective to bring the operation or establishment into complete conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
c.  Non-conforming operation in conforming location. The owner or operator of a non-conforming establishment which is a permitted use within the zoning district in which such operation is situated is allowed three (3) months from the date of passage of this amendment to bring said operation into conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance or such non-conforming operation shall be declared a nuisance upon the determination and adjudication that such is unlawful and a public nuisance by the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia or any other Court having jurisdiction and venue to determine that such is unlawful and a public nuisance. 
6.  Time limit for Special Use Permit approvals. The approval for a Special Use Permit under this section will expire and be void after two (2) years from the date of issuance of the Permit by the City of Hiram, Georgia, unless a final inspection has been made, by the Department of Community Development, Inspections Division, of the State of Georgia, and the operation is in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Special use permit required for retail package liquor store. 
(a)  The use defined as "retail package liquor store" may be permitted only in a B-1, B-2 or PSC zoning district and then only with a special use permit approved in accordance with this Article X where such use is in general conformance with the comprehensive plan for the area in question and upon consideration of the factors listed in Article X, Section A, Paragraphs (4)(a) through (n); provided that the said use should not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the area of the proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity and provided further that all applicable requirements of the City's code of ordinances, including these zoning regulations, as well as all other local, state, and federal requirements for establishment and operation of such a use are satisfied. (See also Article XVI regarding applicable procedures). 
(b)  A special use permit issued pursuant to these provisions shall elapse and expire of its own accord at 12:00 a.m. midnight on the date six (6) months after the special use permit is authorized by the Mayor and Council unless by that date a retail package liquor store has been established and is in operation on the property consistent with the special use permit and all other local, state, and federal permissions required for lawful operation of the retail package liquor store. 
(c)  Unless a special use permit issued by the City expires in accordance with subsection (b) above or is otherwise revoked as may be permitted by law, the special use permit shall elapse, expire, and become void of its own accord upon a conveyance of the property at which point the process for a special use permit must be initiated, pursued, and granted in accordance with the City's then-existing ordinances and all other applicable laws should operation of a retail package liquor store be desired or continued. 
(9)  Off-street parking: See Article VII of this Ordinance. 
(10)  Sign regulations: See Article XII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04, §§ 6, 7, 7-7-2015) 
ARTICLE XI. - DETERMINATION OF UNCLASSIFIED USES 

Sec. A. - Procedure; criteria. 
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified under inherent uses, or uses allowed with the approval of a Special Use Permit, and where such use is not specifically prohibited from the district, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, a written request for a determination of the unclassified use. 
(a)  The Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. 
(b)  If the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted inherently within the district, they shall instruct the Department of Community Development, Planning Division office, of Paulding County, Georgia, to allow said use. 
(c)  In the event the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, determines the proposed use in the district is consistent with the character and intent of a Special Use Permit within the district, then the applicant shall apply for a Special Use Permit, with the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, subject to approval in the normal manner. 
(2)  If the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, is unable to make the determination within fourteen (14) days, or the applicant chooses to appeal the decision, the following procedure shall apply: 
(a)  The Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, shall submit to the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Attorney, for the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, a written request for a determination of the unclassified use at the next regular scheduled Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, meeting. 
(b)  The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Attorney, for the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall review the request as submitted and determine if the proposed use is of a similar character to the district in which it is proposed. 
(c)  If the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Attorney, for the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, determines that the use is of a similar character and meets the intent of the uses permitted inherently within the district, they shall issue and explanation to the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, advising the allowance said use, stating the findings. 
(d)  In the event the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Attorney, for the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, determines the proposed use in the district is consistent with the character and intent of a Special Use Permit within the district, then the applicant shall apply for a Special Use Permit subject to approval in the normal manner. 
(3)  In no event shall the provisions of this Article be used to allow an incompatible use or a use specifically prohibited by this Ordinance within a certain zoning district. 
(4)  Once a use has been allowed or disallowed by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and or the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, it shall then be considered classified under the appropriate category in the district. 
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1(Exh. A), adopted January 1, 2017, amended Art. XII in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. XII, §§ A—W, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-2, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 5, 2013. 

Sec. A. - Short title. 
This article shall hereafter be known and cited as the "City of Hiram Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. B. - Purpose and findings. 
(1)  Purpose. This Article was enacted with the following purposes: 
(a)  To protect the rights of individuals and businesses to convey their messages through signs; 
(b)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; 
(c)  To promote economic, development; 
(d)  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety as it may be affected by distracting signs; 
(e)  To prevent the destruction of the natural beauty and aesthetic environment of the City; 
(f)  To ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign standards; 
(g)  To provide an easier, quicker and more economically efficient way to apply for a sign review application; and 
(h)  To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Findings. 
(a)  The City finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of their idea or identification of their premises. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs throughout the City is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the citizens of the City. 
(c)  The City further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by a public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Virtually all signs erected by public authority are for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings or facilities, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The City finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a proprietary purpose, such as identifying markings on utility poles, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefiting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(d)  The City finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Signs at the entrances to subdivisions or major developments favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(e)  In considering the appropriate level of sign regulation for the City, the City has considered planning studies, reports, news articles, town hall meetings with business owners, sign vendors and related information from a variety of sources. In this ordinance the City strives to balance the variety of interests impacted by signage and potential regulation. The City finds that the specifics of regulation satisfy the legal requirements for sign regulation and balance the various interests of all who are impacted by sign regulation. The materials accompanying adoption of this ordinance attest to the significance and compelling nature of the City's interests as do numerous judicial decisions. While regulating signs, however, the City has been mindful and careful to afford ample methods and alternatives to communicate both commercial and non-commercial messages. 
(f)  The City finds that advances in technology utilizing LED components results in signs brighter in appearance for LED signs than for signs not utilizing LED technology. While exact measurements have not been determined, some of the explanation for the additional brightness by LED signs is that the field of light projection is diametrically opposed to that of standard billboards. Standard billboard lighting, whether ground mounted or platform mounted, is directed at the billboard itself, leaving very little light emission elsewhere; whereas, the LED sign faces the road system providing a brighter, more readable sign. Studies, particularly during non-daylight hours, demonstrate that attention given by drivers to such signs is longer than attention given to non-LED signs. These studies and their conclusions have been compiled and are presented in Compendium of Recent Research Studies on Distraction from Commercial Electronic Variable Message Signs prepared by the Veridian Group in February 2016 discussing a variety of studies conducted since 2008. As a result of these and other studies pertaining to billboard research and information, the City has determined that use of LED technology on outdoor signage in the City requires unique regulation as a result of potential driver distractions and competing traffic interferences. Regulations developed in this chapter are designed to find an appropriate balance between allowance of such new technologies and protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. C. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the Zoning Ordinance shall be given the meanings as set forth therein. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this Article. 
(1)  Abandoned sign. Any sign (a) that for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days does not utilize or employ a sign face that continuously displays a lawful, permissible message, (b) that utilizes a sign face and sign support structure that is cracked, broken, faded or that otherwise reasonably reflects a visible state of disrepair or dilapidation, or (c) with totally or impartially inoperative or missing illumination or electronic and mechanical parts for a period exceeding sixty (60) consecutive days. 
(2)  Air dancer. An inflatable moving advertising product comprising a long fabric tube (with two or more outlets) that is attached to and powered by an electrical fan blowing air through the fabric tube causing the fabric tube to move about in a dancing or flailing motion. 
(3)  Animated sign. Any sign that has, uses, or simulates moving parts or that through the use of movement or changes in lighting or color depicts or provides the illusion of action or motion in conveying a message or creating a special effect or scene. It also includes any sign that revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. For purposes of this Article, "air dancer" is excluded from this definition as is a "human directional sign." 
(4)  Audible sign. Any sign which emits a sound. 
(5)  Awning sign/Awning. Lettering, numbers, and/or other graphics painted or otherwise depicted on a roof-like structure (the "awning") consisting of durable, weather-proof canvas or other fabric material that is attached to and supported entirely by a building wall to which it is attached and that extends from above a door, entrance, or outdoor service area to cover an area immediately adjacent to same. For purposes of this regulation of signs, a marquee is not an awning. 
(6)  Banner. Lettering, numbers, and/or other graphics applied to durable, weather-proof fabric that is displayed within a frame, from a pole, or from a temporary support affixed to the exterior of a building. Flags and awning signs are excluded from the definition of banner. 
(7)  Beacon. Any stationary or evolving/revolving light that flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner for which the intended effect is to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device required or necessary under safety regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration or similar local, state, or federal authorities. 
(8)  Billboard. A freestanding sign with a sign area of more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(9)  City. Refers to the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(10)  Changeable copy sign. A sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods where such changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. For purposes of this regulation, tri-vision signs and LED/LCD signs are excluded from this definition of "changeable copy sign." 
(11)  County. Refers to Paulding County, Georgia. 
(12)  Drive-through/drive-in. A lane for use by motor vehicles where products and/or services are distributed to, or business is transacted with, a person seated in a motor vehicle. 
(13)  Electronic message board. A permanent sign consisting of text or graphical displays that uses an electronic display created through a pattern of lights in a dot matrix configuration allowing the sign face to intermittently change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace or alter the sign face. 
(14)  Fall zone. An area equal to one hundred thirty-three percent (133%) of the height of the structure in every direction. 
(15)  Flag. Any fabric or bunting containing lettering, numbering, colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government, entity, or other organization. 
(16)  Flashing sign. A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and/or uses sudden changes in lighting effects, including intensity of lighting. 
(17)  Freestanding sign. A sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
(18)  Human directional sign. Displays of messaging where the message is presented by a person who holds or otherwise displays the message as a sign holder, sign twirler, sign spinner, sign walker, human arrow, or in any other method or manner where action or conduct of the person is used in the display of the message, including presentation of a message by way of costume. 
(19)  Illuminated, external. Illumination is so arranged that the light source for a sign is external to the sign and directed toward the sign for illumination. 
(20)  Illuminated, internal. Illumination is so arranged that the light source for a sign is contained behind or as an integral part of the sign face with no illumination source external to the sign. 
(21)  Inflatable sign. A configuration of rubber, canvas, vinyl, or other durable, weather-proof fabric or material that is inflated by air or an inert gas such as helium and that upon being inflated displays a message or other graphics. 
(22)  LED sign. A sign or any portion thereof that uses light emitting diode technology or other similar semiconductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise knowns as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. 
(23)  LCD sign. A sign or any portion thereof that uses liquid crystal diode technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. 
(24)  Lot. A unit of land as defined in a single deed recorded in the Superior Court record of deeds for Paulding County, Georgia with the description of the land in said deed constituting a lot for purposes of this Article. Provided, further, that two or more adjoining lots in common ownership and that are physically unified by the existence of a common structure or development located thereon shall constitute and be considered one lot for purposes of this Article. 
(25)  Marquee/marquee sign. A sign wholly contained within and as a part of the framing of a permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building that is composed of durable construction materials, excluding canvas and fabric, and that is permanently affixed to and wholly supported by the building wall to which it is affixed. 
(26)  Menu sign. A sign or sign structure which is fully enclosed or otherwise protected from the elements, including but not limited to a box, shadow box, or cabinet, which is attached to a wall or is freestanding and is oriented such that the sign face is directed toward a drive-through/drive-in lane. 
(27)  Mobile sign. A sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle (whether motorized or drawn). 
(28)  Monument sign. A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground and not attached to or a part of or supported by a building and designed in such a manner that the base is at least as wide as the sign and the sign face is flush with the supporting solid base which is flush with the ground. 
(29)  Multi-tenant. One or more buildings, located on a single premise, containing two (2) or more separate and distinct individual establishments, which occupy separate portions of the building and which are physically separated from each other by walls. 
(30)  Neon sign. A sign consisting of luminous gas-discharge tubes containing rarefied neon gas or other rarefied, inert gas that through the use of an electrical source produce colored light. 
(31)  Nonconforming sign. Any sign which was legal at the time of erection, but which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(32)  Nonconventional signs. Air dancers, mobile signs, wind socks, and items known commonly as "wind wavers," "streamers," and "feather signs/feather flags" along with "human directional signs." 
(33)  Permanent sign. Any sign which, when constructed and installed, is intended for permanent use and by virtue of how it is constructed and installed constitutes a fixture to the property upon which it is constructed or attached. 
(34)  Person. A natural or legal person, including a firm, organization, partnership, trust, or corporation. 
(35)  Projecting sign. Any sign that is affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted. 
(36)  Public sign. Any sign erected by or caused to be erected by a governmental entity, public utility signs, traffic signs, railroad signs, and gateway signs. 
(37)  Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, or supported by the roof structure. It also includes any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear or actually be roof elements of a building. 
(38)  Sign. A sign is a device, fixture, placard, structure or representation that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others and which is placed out of doors in view of the general public or, when near the inside surface of a window, placed in such a manner as to be in the view of the general public outside the building. Sign includes the support structure used as well as the sign face. 
(39)  Sign face. That part of a sign that is used or is available for use for purposes of displaying a message. 
(40)  Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the sign face of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
(41)  Standard informational sign. A sign with an area of not greater than twelve (12) square feet, with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflecting elements, flags, or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three (3) feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half (1½) inches. 
(42)  Suspended sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
(43)  Tri-vision sign. A sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. 
(44)  Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building. 
(45)  Window sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass, either inside or outside the building, and that is readable from the exterior of the structure. 
(46)  Windsock. A flexible cylinder of durable, weather-proof fabric, open on both ends, that is attached to or hung from a frame, stand, eave or soffit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. D. - Powers and duties of personnel. 
The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. E. - Applicability. 
The standards of this Article shall apply to all signs erected within the incorporated area of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. F. - Permit required. 
Unless specifically exempted by the express terms of this Article, any person seeking to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, or convert any sign or sign structure in the City shall first obtain a permit for such sign. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. G. - Signs exempt from permit requirement. 
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirement of this Article: 
(1)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight (8) inches in height; 
(2)  Flags; 
(3)  Signs mounted on doors that do not exceed one (1) square foot in size and no more than one (1) sign per door and that do not consist of any electrical component or external/internal source of illumination specifically intended for the sign; 
(4)  Signs which are not readable from a public right-of-way or from neighboring properties; 
(5)  Public signs; 
(6)  Window signs; and 
(7)  Standard informational signs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. H. - Permitting process. 
(1)  To obtain a sign permit, a complete permit application shall be filed with the City Manager's office and a permit fee, as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Governing Authority, shall be paid at the time of submission of this application. A permit application is not complete unless and until the permit fee is paid and the following materials and information are provided by the applicant: 
(a)  The type of the sign as defined in this Article and all other information required to establish compliance of the proposed sign with this Article; 
(b)  The tax parcel ID number and address of the building, structure, or parcel upon or to which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(c)  A sketch or drawing, to scale, of the proposed sign showing size, dimensions, type of sign, type of illumination, height, color scheme, elevation, areas of changeable copy, and other information as required by the City to establish compliance with this Article; 
(d)  A survey to scale showing the property upon which the sign is to be located, the proposed location of the sign on subject property, the distance of the sign from the subject property's boundaries, required setbacks, and all existing structures or buildings on the subject property; 
i.  The survey otherwise required by this section shall not be required of: 
a.  An applicant for a temporary sign provided, however, that an applicant for a temporary sign shall provide a diagram, schematic, or other visual depiction showing where the temporary sign(s) is(are) proposed for placement and showing accurate distances of the temporary sign(s) from adjacent active roadways, driveways, and parking areas; and 
b.  An applicant seeking a permit for a sign in connection with planned occupancy of a pre-existing building or structure, including habitable space therein, but only (1) where the signage proposed is to replace prior signage associated with the immediately preceding occupancy of the building, structure, or the habitable space therein to be occupied by the applicant and (2) where the applicant proposes the same kind, size, style, design, placement, and lighting of the sign as existed in connection with the immediately prior occupant of that space to be occupied and then only to the extent that such kind, size, style, design, placement, and lighting of the prior signage was lawful. 
(e)  The square foot area per sign; 
(f)  The name(s), address(es), and contact information of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the sign is to be located; 
(g)  Written consent of the owner of the property, or his/her agent, granting permission for the placement, maintenance, size, and height of the sign to be placed on the property; 
(h)  For all wall signs, one set of building elevations; 
(i)  The name, address, telephone number, fax number, e-mail address, insurance company and policy number, and Occupational Tax Certificate number of the contractor installing the sign, including a copy of a current Occupational Tax Certificate, from a City or County located in the State of Georgia and, where applicable, the sign owner; 
(j)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address; and 
(k)  The zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(2)  Upon the submission of a complete permit application and payment of the required permit fee by the applicant, the City Manager or his designee shall have thirty (30) business days to issue a decision granting or denying a permit. The 30-day period shall not begin to run until a complete sign permit application is received by the City Manager. At or before expiration of the 30th business day following receipt of the application, the City Manager or his designee shall either grant or deny the requested permit. If a decision is not made on or before expiration of the 30-day period, then the requested permit shall be deemed granted. 
(3)  Where a permit application and accompanying documentation show that the desired sign will conform to all of the requirements of this Article and other pertinent laws and ordinances regulating signage, then a permit shall be granted. 
(4)  Where a permit application is incomplete, contains a false material statement or omission, or requests a sign that does not comply with the applicable requirements of this Article or any other pertinent laws and ordinances regulating signage, the permit shall be denied. 
(5)  The City Manager or his designee shall provide the applicant with written notice of the City Manager's decision by hand-delivery or by mailing such notice to the applicant's address on or before the 30th business day following the City Manager's receipt of the applicant's complete permit application and permit fee. If the permit is denied, the written notice shall set forth the reasons for denial. 
(6)  Lawfully approved and issued permits shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued is not completely erected and/or installed within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit. No refunds shall be made for a permit once approved. If a permit expires and later the permittee desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new permit application for the sign must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(7)  An application may be withdrawn prior to expiration of the thirty (30) day period provided to the City on which to act on the application. To be effective, notice from the applicant advising of withdrawal of the application must be in writing and provided to the City Manager by such means as to insure that the notice is received before expiration of the thirty (30) days period provided to the City on which to act on the application. No refund of any fees paid in support of the application shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. I. - Revocation of permits. 
In the event that a sign permit is issued for a sign (1) for which the application was incomplete and/or less than all of the information required by this Article was provided or which contained a false material statement or omission, (2) that did not comply with the requirements of this Article, or (3) that is then erected or installed in violation of the requirements of this Article or the permit, the permit shall be revoked. The City Manager or his designee shall provide the permittee written notice of intent to revoke the permit in the same manner as a notice of denial. The notice shall provide a time, not sooner than ten (10) business days nor later than thirty (30) business days from the date of the notice, for the permittee to appear before the City Manager and provide evidence as to why the sign permit should not be revoked. A decision thereafter by the City Manager to revoke the permit shall be reduced to writing and served on the permittee no later than ten (10) days from the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. J. - Appeals. 
(1)  In the event a permit application is denied or revoked, the permittee may appeal the denial or revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk no later than ten (10) business days after the denial or revocation. The Governing Authority shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least six (6) days after the notice of appeal is received. The appellant may consent to a continued date of hearing, provided the hearing shall be held no later than 45 days from the date of appeal. A final decision on an appeal shall be rendered by the Governing Authority no more than thirty (30) days from the date such appeal was heard. Such final decision shall be in writing and sent by certified mail to the permittee postmarked no later than thirty (30) days from the date the appeal was heard. If a decision is not rendered by the Governing Authority within the 30-day period, then the permit shall be deemed granted. 
(2)  If the permittee is dissatisfied with the decision of the Governing Authority on appeal, then such person may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. K. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in the City: 
(1)  Signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line, or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a street and visible from a street, excluding holiday lighting displayed for no more than thirty (30) days before and after a recognized local, state, or federal holiday; 
(2)  Audible signs; 
(3)  Signs in a public right-of-way, other than public signs; 
(4)  Signs mounted, attached, or otherwise located on a tree, utility pole, or other similar structure; 
(5)  Roof signs and signs that extend vertically above any portion of a roof or parapet of the applicable wall, including but not limited to any type of illuminated structures or devices and inflatable signs; 
(6)  Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by the United States Supreme Court or that depict nudity or sexual conduct as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-52; 
(7)  Signs which advertise an activity which is illegal under federal, state, or local law; 
(8)  Abandoned signs; 
(9)  Animated signs; 
(10)  Changeable copy signs within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a public right-of-way that are in excess of thirty (30) square feet; 
(11)  Multiple message LED/LCD signs within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a public right-of-way that are in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet; 
(12)  Flashing signs; 
(13)  Signs that resemble or depict official traffic control signs or signals; 
(14)  Projecting signs; 
(15)  Stanchion signs; 
(16)  Tri-vision signs; 
(17)  LED/LCD signs with a sign face over thirty-two (32) square feet but not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet and any LED/LCD sign that changes copy in any manner, method, or respect at any interval of less than eight (8) seconds; and 
(18)  Mobile signs except where expressly permitted in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. L. - General regulations. 
Unless a stricter regulation is provided for elsewhere in this Article, all signs throughout the City shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Computation of Sign Area. 
(a)  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest continuous polygon comprised of not more than eight (8) straight lines with intersecting angles of only 90 degrees enclosing the limits of a sign face together with any materials or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other City regulations and is clearly incidental to the sign itself. The method of computation of sign area is illustrated below: 
(b)  If polygons established around wall signs located on the same street oriented wall are within twenty-four (24) inches or less of one another, then the area of the sign shall be measured within one continuous polygon. 
(c)  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are back to back, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the areas on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
(2)  Computation of Sign Height. Except where prescribed otherwise in this Article, the height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign structure at normal grade to the highest point of the sign structure. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street immediately adjacent to the parcel where the sign is to be located or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. Where the normal grade is below the nearest point of the crown of a public street immediately adjacent to the parcel where the sign is to be located, the sign height shall be measured as if situated level with the crown of such public street. 
(3)  Sign Location. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
(b)  No sign or any part thereof, except authorized public signs, shall be located in any public right-of-way or on public property. 
(c)  No sign may be located any closer than fifteen (15) feet to an intersection of two (2) public roadways as measured from the nearest point of intersection of the two (2) rights-of-way. 
(d)  Unless a more restrictive setback is specified elsewhere in this Article, in a zoning overlay district, or in the conditions of zoning, all signs and all parts of signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way, or twenty (20) feet from the edge of pavement if a private street, and no sign shall project over the right-of-way or a private street. 
(4)  Changeable Copy Signs. 
(a)  Changeable copy shall be permitted only as a part of monument signs, menu signs, and wall signs. 
(b)  Changeable copy signs shall not flash or scroll or be animated in any manner but, rather, and shall remain constant in lighting, color, and all other changeable variables allowed by technology. 
(c)  If the changeable copy sign consists of or contains as a component an electronic message board, the electronic message board must contain a default mechanism that freezes the sign face display if a malfunction occurs. 
(d)  The changeable copy portion of a sign shall not exceed 50% of the overall sign area, or thirty-two (32) square feet, whichever is less. 
(e)  Changeable copy signs may not change more than once per minute. 
(5)  Construction Standards. 
(a)  All signs permitted under this Article shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable building and electrical codes of the City. All building and electrical permits required for the erection, modification, or conversion of any sign must be obtained through the Department of Community Development of Paulding County. 
(b)  Sign faces shall be flat, with protrusions of no more than two (2) inches to allow for the texture of the sign and words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements. No sign or sign face shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding therefrom. 
(c)  Wall signs must consist of an electrical raceway to which lettering, numbers, emblems, designs, and all other aspects of the sign face must be attached. The raceway must be attached to the wall. The maximum allowable sign depth for a non-neon wall sign is 10 inches measured from the wall to which the raceway is attached to the front edge of the sign face. For neon wall signs the maximum allowable sign depth is 12 inches measured from the wall to which the raceway is attached to the front edge of the sign face. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified in this Article, signs may be illuminated internally or externally. In no event, however, shall the light source be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates aspects of lighting. 
i.  Illumination shall not interfere with the effectiveness of or obscure traffic signs, devices, or signals. 
ii.  Illumination shall be constructed and configured to effectively shield beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the public roadways and sidewalks and that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which would otherwise interfere with the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(e)  Monument signs must consist of a masonry material such as brick and mortar, stone or rock, or stucco comprising a solid base as well as the cabinet or framing within which signage is to be displayed or, alternatively, as a veneer over construction grade block. All materials used with a monument sign, including signage displayed within the monument sign must be comprised of weather-proof materials. Metal, wood, and EIFS may be used as accents only and may comprise no more than thirty percent (30%) of the monument sign area excluding from the computation the monument base and individual sign faces. Landscaping and grass shall be maintained in front of, behind, and around the base of monument signs. 

(f)  The sign area of a marquee sign shall not exceed forty-five (45) square feet, may not extend any more than eight (8) feet from the building façade to which the marquee is attached, and the lowest point of the marquee sign shall not be less than eight (8) feet above the established grade of the sidewalk, drive, or other area over which the marquee extends. 
(6)  Mobile Signs. 
(a)  The motorized or drawn vehicle used as a mobile sign must be lawfully registered, bear a current tagged license plate, and be insured as it would if used for transportation purposes. 
(b)  A motorized or drawn vehicle to which a sign is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, or painted or drawn on that is used daily either for delivery of products and services or that is used for daily transportation by a person may be parked in locations customary to the providing of the product or service. Where such a vehicle is not used for personal transportation of the owner or operator of the vehicle, the vehicle, when not in use, shall be parked in the service/delivery area assigned to the establishment for which the vehicle is used. Where such a vehicle is used for daily transportation by the owner or operator of the vehicle, the vehicle, when not in use, may be parked as would a vehicle to which no sign is attached, mounted, pasted, or painted or drawn. 
(7)  Inspections. All signs are subject to inspection on a reasonable basis by the City and/or its designee to determine compliance with any permit issued and the provisions of this Article as well as any other regulations to which the sign is subject, including, but not limited to, all applicable electrical, safety, and building codes. 
(8)  Occupation tax certificate and public liability insurance required. No person shall engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the City, unless and until such entity has obtained or provided a copy of a valid occupation tax certificate from a city or county within the State of Georgia and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia evidencing that the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage for any one (1) claim, and public liability insurance in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death to one (1) person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier shall notify the City thirty (30) days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage provided by such policy, including nonrenewal, cancellation, and nonpayment of any premium. 
(9)  Inflatable signs. Inflatable signs are limited to a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet measured from its base to its highest point. At all times while partially or completely inflated, the sign must be securely anchored to the ground or to a structure permanently and securely affixed to the ground and must at all times be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from a right-of-way. 
(10)  Nonconventional signs. Use of nonconventional signs is limited to a maximum time period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per year. A permittee may swap out and use different nonconventional signs and/or in combination with other nonconventional signs authorized by this Article during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability and identifies in its application the nonconventional signs to be used during the permit period. In no event, however, shall a permittee during an authorized permit period utilize contemporaneously any more than three (3) of the same type of nonconventional sign. 
(a)  Such signage must be secured at all times and must at all times be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from a right-of-way. 
(b)  Air dancers permitted hereby shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height measured from the base on the ground to its highest point. 
(c)  Windsocks permitted hereby shall not exceed five (5) feet in length and may not be displayed at a height exceeding twenty-five (25) feet from the grade of the ground immediately below the signage. 
(d)  Feather signs/feather flags permitted hereby shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in length and may not be displayed at a height exceeding twenty-five (25) feet from the grade of the ground immediately below the signage. 
(e)  Excepting any costume that the person may wear as part of a human directional sign, all other materials utilized shall be weather-proof and may not exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
(11)  Compliance with provisions. 
(a)  Except where permitted otherwise in this Article, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, or convert (or cause same to) any sign which does not comply with the standards and requirements of this Article. 
(b)  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. M. - Restrictions based on zoning district. 
The following standards govern signs within specific zoning districts, and only the signs identified within each zoning district are permitted: 
(1)  Agricultural (A-1) District. 
(a)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from the ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(b)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. A flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(c)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(d)  Mobile signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, mobile signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(e)  Monument signs/Wall signs. 
i.  For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, one (1) monument sign limited to a maximum sign area of one hundred fifteen (115) square feet and a sign height of no more than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted per each street frontage abutting the lot. 
ii.  For each platted single family residential subdivision, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, one (1) monument sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. Alternatively, to the foregoing, a platted single-family residential subdivision shall be permitted for each entrance up to two (2) wall signs with a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, two (2) monument signs limited to a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
iii.  For a platted single-family residential subdivision with more than one (1) identifiable, internal section, as shown on an approved plat, one (1) additional monument sign per identifiable section within the subdivision is permissible. The maximum sign area for such a sign shall be sixteen (16) square feet with a maximum sign height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
iv.  Unless the sign is located on a lot occupied by commercial or institutional uses, changeable copy signs and signs illuminated internally are prohibited. 
(f)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(2)  Suburban Residential (R-2) District, Sewered Suburban Residential (R-2 with sewer) District, Planned Residential Development (PRD) District, Open Space Residential Development (OSRD) District, and Low-Density Quality Residential Development District. 
(a)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from the ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(b)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(c)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(d)  Mobile signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, mobile signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(e)  Monument signs/Wall signs. 
i.  For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, one (1) monument sign limited to a maximum sign area of one hundred fifteen (115) square feet and a sign height of no more than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted per each street frontage abutting the lot. 
ii.  For each platted single family residential subdivision, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, one (1) monument sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. Alternatively to the foregoing, a platted single-family residential subdivision shall be permitted for each entrance up to two (2) wall signs with a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, two (2) monument signs limited to a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
iii.  For a platted single-family residential subdivision with more than one (1) identifiable, internal section, as shown on an approved plat, one (1) additional monument sign per identifiable section within the subdivision is permissible. The maximum sign area for such a sign shall be sixteen (16) square feet with a maximum sign height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
iv.  Unless the sign is located on a lot occupied by commercial or institutional uses, changeable copy signs and signs illuminated internally are prohibited. 
(f)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(3)  Multi-family Non-Fee Simple (RENTAL) Residential (R-4) District, Duplex (R-5) District, Multi-family Fee Simple (Non-Rental) Residential (R-7) District. 
(a)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from such ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(b)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(c)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(d)  Monument signs. 
i.  For lots occupied by institutional uses, one (1) monument sign limited to a maximum sign area of one hundred fifteen (115) square feet and a sign height of no more than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted per each street frontage abutting the lot. 
ii.  For a multifamily development, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, one (1) monument sign shall be permitted for each entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. Alternatively to the foregoing, a multifamily development shall be permitted for each entrance up to two (2) wall signs with a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, two (2) monument signs limited to a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
(e)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(4)  Low Rise Office (LRO) District, Office-Institutional (O-I) District, and Neighborhood Commercial (NB) District. 
(a)  Awning signs. The sign area of such sign shall be deducted from the aggregate amount of sign area that may be available pursuant to this Article for wall signage for the wall to which the awning sign is attached. The sign area of an awning/canopy sign shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the surface area of the durable, weather-proof canvas or other fabric material on which the lettering, numbers, and/or other graphics are affixed. 
(b)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from such ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(c)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(d)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(e)  Mobile signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, mobile signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(f)  Monument signs. One (1) monument sign limited to a maximum sign area of one hundred fifteen (115) square feet and a sign height of no more than fifteen (15) feet shall be permitted for per lot, excluding spin sites and out-parcels. Internal illumination of this sign is prohibited. 
(g)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(h)  Wall signs. Upon the Applicant designating one (1) wall of the business establishment as the principal wall, the maximum total square footage permitted for use as wall signage is limited to the product of the designated principal wall's square footage multiplied by 40%. The square footage available for use as wall signage is inclusive of sign face as well as the framing, bordering or other kind of graphic or device used to distinguish and/or differentiate the sign from the wall or any other signage. The square footage available for use may be apportioned among multiple walls of the establishment seeking to utilize wall signage. Where more than one (1) wall sign is to be used, each wall sign is credited against and reduces the total amount of square footage available for additional wall signs. In no event shall a wall sign consist of or use or utilize an electronic message board any larger than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(i)  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the window area and shall not be illuminated. 
(5)  General Business (B-1) District and Planned Shopping Center (PSC) District. 
(a)  Awning signs. The sign area of such sign shall be deducted from the aggregate amount of sign area that may be available pursuant to this Article for wall signage for the wall to which the awning sign is attached. The sign area of an awning/canopy sign shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the surface area of the durable, weather-proof canvas or other fabric material on which the lettering, numbers, and/or other graphics are affixed. 
(b)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from such ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(c)  Beacons. Use of a beacon may be permitted for a maximum time period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
(d)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(e)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(f)  Marquee sign. To the extent a marquee is lawfully permitted, a marquee sign may be utilized as allowed by this Article. 
(g)  Mobile signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, mobile signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(h)  Menu signs. Two (2) menu signs are permitted for a lot containing a drive-through/drive-in lane. A menu signs shall be oriented toward the drive-through/drive-in lane, and shall not be legible from any public right-of-way. Menu signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Menu signs shall be internally illuminated only. 
(i)  Monument signs. 
i.  Out-parcels and lots with single-unit commercial developments shall be permitted one (1) monument sign per public street frontage with a maximum sign area of seventy-five (75) square feet and maximum height of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii.  Lots with shopping centers or small retail centers with multiple business units shall be permitted one (1) monument sign per public street frontage with a maximum sign area of one hundred (100) square feet and a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. If the lot has more than one thousand (1,000) linear feet of public street frontage, excluding spin sites and out-parcels, a second monument sign with a maximum sign area of one-hundred (100) square feet and height of twenty-five (25) feet may be permitted. 
(j)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(k)  Suspended signs. For a multi-tenant commercial or office building, one (1) suspended, non-illuminated sign per tenant shall be permitted. Suspended signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area, must be uniform in size, material, and shape, and shall be suspended adjacent to the entrance of the tenant space. Suspended signs shall be shall be placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building. A minimum eight (8) foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom of a suspended sign and the walkway below. 
(l)  Wall signs. Upon the Applicant designating one (1) wall of the business establishment as the principal wall, the maximum total square footage permitted for use as wall signage is limited to the product of the designated principal wall's square footage multiplied by 40%. The square footage available for use as wall signage is inclusive of sign face as well as the framing, bordering or other kind of graphic or device used to distinguish and/or differentiate the sign from the wall or any other signage. The square footage available for use may be apportioned among multiple walls of the establishment seeking to utilize wall signage. Where more than one (1) wall sign is to be used, each wall sign is credited against and reduces the total amount of square footage available for additional wall signs. In no event shall a wall sign consist of or use or utilize an electronic message board any larger than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(m)  Window signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the window area. 
(6)  Highway Business (B-2) District, Light Industrial (I-1) District, and Heavy Industrial (I-2) District. 
(a)  Awning signs. Awning signs are permitted, but the sign area of such sign shall be deducted from the aggregate amount of sign area that may be available pursuant to this Article for wall signage for the wall to which the awning sign is attached. The sign area of an awning/canopy sign shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the surface area of the durable, weather-proof canvas or other fabric material on which the lettering, numbers, and/or other graphics are affixed. 
(b)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from such ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(c)  Beacons. Use of a beacon may be permitted for a maximum time period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
(d)  Billboards. 
i.  Billboards shall not exceed three hundred twenty (320) square feet in sign area. 
ii.  Billboards shall not exceed a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
iii.  Billboards shall only be located along and oriented toward State numbered primary routes or national highways. 
iv.  In addition to all other applicable set back requirements, billboards are required to be set back a minimum three hundred (300) feet from all residential or A-1 zoning district lines and property lines of lots containing a public or private school, place of worship, public building, public park, or daycare facility. 
v.  Billboards shall not be located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of any other billboard along the same roadside. For corner properties located at the intersection of two roadways, the billboard shall be considered to have frontage on both roadways. 
vi.  The lot on which the billboard is located shall have sufficient area to accommodate the fall zone, and excepting the sign, no buildings or structures shall be contained within the fall zone. 
vii.  Billboard sign faces may not be vertically or horizontally stacked or configured in a V pattern. 
(e)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(f)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(g)  Marquee sign. To the extent a marquee is lawfully permitted, a marquee sign may be utilized as allowed by this Article. 
(h)  Mobile signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, mobile signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(i)  Menu signs. Two (2) menu signs are permitted for a lot containing a drive-through/drive-in lane. A menu sign shall be oriented toward the drive-through/drive-in lane, and shall not be legible from any public right-of-way. Menu signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Menu signs shall be internally illuminated only. 
(j)  Monument Signs. 
i.  Out-parcels and single-unit industrial or commercial lots shall be permitted one (1) monument per street frontage with a maximum sign area of one hundred fifteen (115) square feet and maximum height of fifteen (15) feet. 
ii.  Industrial parks, business parks, technology parks, and shopping centers, or small retail centers with multiple business units shall be permitted one (1) monument sign per street frontage with a maximum sign area of one-hundred (100) square feet and a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. If the lot has more than one thousand (1,000) linear feet of street frontage, excluding spin sites and out-parcels, a second monument sign with a maximum sign area of one-hundred (100) square feet and maximum height of twenty-five (25) square feet shall be permitted along such street frontage. The sign shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any right-of-way or property line. 
(k)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(l)  Suspended Signs. For a multi-tenant commercial or office building, one (1) suspended, non-illuminated sign per tenant shall be permitted. Suspended signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area, must be uniform in size, material, and shape, and shall be suspended adjacent to the entrance of the tenant space. Suspended signs shall be shall be placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building. A minimum eight (8) foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom of a suspended sign and the walkway below. 
(m)  Wall signs. Upon the Applicant designating one (1) wall of the business establishment as the principal wall, the maximum total square footage permitted for use as wall signage is limited to the product of the designated principal wall's square footage multiplied by 40%. The square footage available for use as wall signage is inclusive of sign face as well as the framing, bordering or other kind of graphic or device used to distinguish and/or differentiate the sign from the wall or any other signage. The square footage available for use may be apportioned among multiple walls of the establishment seeking to utilize wall signage. Where more than one (1) wall sign is to be used, each wall sign is credited against and reduces the total amount of square footage available for additional wall signs. In no event shall a wall sign consist of or use or utilize an electronic message board any larger than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(n)  Window Signs. Window signs are permitted. Window signs shall not occupy in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the window area. 
(7)  Manufactured Home Park (R-6) District. 
(a)  Banners. One (1) banner no larger than twenty-four (24) square feet in area shall be permitted per lot for a maximum period of thirty (30) consecutive days no more than six (6) times per calendar year. 
i.  No banner shall be mounted or affixed in any way to a building so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet. If not mounted or affixed to a building, the banner must be displayed within a frame or on a pole securely resting or affixed to the ground and extending no more than five (5) feet in height from such ground. 
ii.  A permittee may swap out and use different banners during the life of a 30-day permit allowed by this Article, but never contemporaneously with another banner, provided that the permittee requests such interchangeability in its application. 
(b)  Flags. No more than three (3) flags and/or flagpoles may be displayed. The flagpole shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height measured from the where the flagpole foundation is flush with the ground. 
(c)  Inflatable signs/Nonconventional signs. For lots occupied by commercial or institutional uses, inflatable signs and nonconventional signs are permitted as authorized by this Article. 
(d)  Monument signs. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each entrance to a mobile home park with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, one (1) monument sign shall be permitted for each such entrance with each such entrance sign limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. Alternatively to the foregoing, a manufactured home park shall be permitted for each entrance up to two (2) wall signs with a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet or, alternatively, two (2) monument signs limited to a maximum aggregate sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a maximum height of six (6) feet measured from where the sign foundation is flush with the ground. 
(e)  Standard informational signs. Each lot may display one (1) standard informational sign, provided, however, that lots upon which more than one business operates shall be permitted one (1) standard informational sign for each such business operating on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. N. - Penalties for violation of provisions. 
(1)  If any sign or aspect of a sign that is regulated by this Article is installed, created, constructed, altered, converted, maintained, or used in violation of any provision of this Article, then the City Manager or his designee shall provide written notice to the permittee of the violation. Similar notice of a violation shall be provided to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located if the sign is one that was not and has not been permitted by the City and that otherwise does not exist lawfully. The notice shall provide a period not to exceed thirty (30) days within which to correct or remove the sign or otherwise bring the sign into compliance with applicable provisions of this Article. 
(a)  If the violation is not corrected within the time provided, then the City Manager or his designee shall issue a written citation to the permittee or property owner (if the sign is one that was not and has not been permitted by the City and that otherwise does not exist lawfully) and the matter shall be placed on the docket for hearing by the City's Municipal Court. 
(2)  A person determined to have violated any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each demonstrated daily violation of the provision, by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or any combination of both. The foregoing shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the City, including, but not limited to, revocation of a permit as well as removal of the sign. The City may seek affirmative relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal of a sign not brought into compliance with the provisions of this Article. Appeals of any decisions or orders of the City's Municipal Court shall be taken by filing a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided by O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq. 
(3)  If it is determined by the City Manager or his designee that a sign poses a reasonable threat of danger to public safety, written notice of such threat to public safety shall be provided immediately to the sign or building owner and/or the beneficial user of the sign, providing no more than five (5) days' notice within which to alleviate and remedy the threat to public safety in compliance with all applicable regulations and will state that if such corrective and remedial action is not taken that the sign shall be removed by the City as provided for herein. 
(a)  If the threat of danger is not so alleviated and remedied within five (5) days' written notice, the City shall initiate efforts that in its reasonable judgment alleviates and/or remedies the threat to public safety which may entail removal of the sign. If the threat poses an imminent danger to the public that the City reasonably determines to require immediate action to alleviate and remedy the danger, the advance written notice described in this section shall be required, but the City is permitted to undertake reasonable action to alleviate and remedy the threat. The threat and its immediacy shall be documented and notice of the action and the reasons for shall be provided as soon as practicable to the sign or building owner and/or the beneficial user of the sign. Such City-initiated alleviation and remedy may include, but is not limited to, removal of the sign. In all instances where the City undertakes to alleviate or remedy such a threat, the costs of those efforts, including the costs of any removal of a sign and all incidental expenses and costs incurred in connection with removal, shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectable in the same manner as any City property taxes. 
(4)  Any sign removed by the City or his designee pursuant to the provisions in this Section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. If it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived from removal of a sign, the City may sell the same at a private or public sale at the best price obtainable, and shall keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Where the proceeds derived from such a sale are less than the costs and expenses incurred in removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located, such lien to be collectable in the same manner as any City property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. O. - Variances. 
(1)  An application for a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this Article may be initiated by submitting a completed variance application to the City Manager on the form provided by the City Manager's office and paying the application fee, as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Governing Authority. The applicant for variance shall be placed on a council agenda no less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of application and payment of the required application fee. Notice of all variance applications shall be made in the same manner as notice of zoning variances. The Governing Authority shall render a final decision on all variance applications within thirty (30) days of hearing the matter. Any applicant for whom variance is denied may petition for writ of certiorari from the Governing Authority's decision to superior court. 
(2)  Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(a)  The topography of the lot on which the sign is located or to be located renders it impossible to comport with the applicable standards of this Article. 
(b)  The natural features of the lot on which the sign is located or to be located, or of the land immediately adjacent to the lot, impairs the visibility of the sign such that it cannot be seen. 
(3)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. 
(4)  No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. 
(5)  No variance shall be available or granted from any hardship that is self-induced or the result of the man-made alteration of the topography and natural features. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. P. - Non-conforming signs. 
(1)  Nonconforming signs may stay in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(a)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or renders it dilapidated, unsightly, or unkempt; or 
(b)  The sign has been damaged to such extent that more than minor repairs or a material change is required to restore the sign, provided that such damage was not the result of act of God or by other circumstances beyond control of owner of sign. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted provided that said replacement does not constitute a material change to the sign. All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
(3)  Ordinary repair and maintenance such as electrical or lettering repairs is permitted; provided however, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the standards of this Article. "Refacing" of a sign face (defined as removal followed immediately by installation of a sign face of the same size, style, font, and configuration as that existing immediately thereto) shall be treated as ordinary repair and maintenance. 
(a)  To the extent any permits or permissions are required for any ordinary repair and maintenance to be undertaken, such shall be obtained prior to undertaking the repair and maintenance. A failure to do so voids and eliminates any nonconforming status otherwise attaching to the sign and requires that the sign be brought into compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(4)  To the extent that a nonconforming sign allowable hereunder is damaged or destroyed by an act of God, then such sign may be repaired or restored to its condition and configuration existing immediately prior to the damage or destruction, provided such is accomplished within sixty (60) days of the event resulting in the damage or destruction. 
(5)  A nonconforming wall sign may be removed and reinstalled by the permittee or sign owner as a part of a building renovation or revitalization project so long as the permittee provides the City Manager with photographs detailing the dimensions of the existing wall signs prior to removal and no alterations, modifications, or changes of any kind are made to the wall signs upon reinstallation, unless it is to bring it into conformance with the requirements of this Article. Any wall sign removed without prior identification from the City Manager as a legal nonconforming wall sign will be subject to all of the sign standards established in this Article upon reinstallation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. Q. - Conflicts with zoning overlay districts. 
To the extent that any regulations governing any zoning overlay district now existing or later enacted conflict with this Article, the most restrictive provisions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
Sec. R. - Severability. 
Should any article, section, clause, or provision of this Article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, it being the intent of the Governing Authority that each article, section, clause, and provision hereof be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2017-1(Exh. A), 1-10-2017) 
ARTICLE XIII. - C-O, CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. A. - Purpose, intent and authority. 
(1)  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to establish standards for the design of sites, buildings, structures, plantings, signs, street hardware and such other improvements that are visible to the public and affect the physical development of land within certain designated transportation corridors. 
The following standards shall be considered in evaluating projects proposed within the Corridor Overlay District. 
(a)  All structures will be evaluated on the overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the quality of its design and its relationship to the surrounding area. 
(b)  The quality of design goes beyond the materials of construction to include scale, mass, color, proportion, and compatibility with adjoining developments. 
(c)  Colors shall be harmonious and only the use of compatible accents shall be permitted. 
(d)  Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 
(e)  Any design in which the structure frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
(f)  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 
(2)  Statement of Intent. These standards are intended to promote high quality creative development that will combine imagination, innovation and variety in the appearance of buildings and sites in the overlay zone. These standards are further intended to preserve and enhance property values and to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for consistent and coordinated treatment of the property encompassed by the selected transportation corridors. 
The creation of the Corridor Overlay District will promote developments that will allow the City of Hiram, Georgia, to grow in positive and sustainable patterns. These standards include regulatory control and design of building development and materials, parking areas, signage, transportation (pedestrian and vehicular), green-space and trees/vegetation. 
(3)  Authority. Authority underlying creation of the Corridor Overlay Zoning District is provided for in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 36-66-2, the Charter of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and/or the Code of Ordinances, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(4)  Statement of Significance. 
(a)  State Route 120 (Marietta Highway) traverses the City of Hiram, Georgia, from the east, beginning 0.11 miles Southwest from Stephens Mill Drive, and ending 0.08 miles Northeast from Bobo Road. State Route 120 (Marietta Highway) is a divided, four-lane with median from the Cobb County line to its intersection and convergence with U. S. Highway 278. Marietta Highway is considered by the County Comprehensive Plan and associated Future Land Use Map, of Paulding County, Georgia, to be one of the County's primary commercial corridors. Future development of this highly visible corridor will dramatically change the image of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  Bill Carruth Parkway f/k/a West Hiram Parkway is located in the eastern portion of the City of Hiram, Georgia, along U. S. 278/GA 6. The City of Hiram, Georgia's, portion of the roadway begins at the intersection of Marietta Highway with U. S. Highway 278 and extends southward 0.08 miles. The highway serves as both connector and bypass route. Bill Carruth Parkway is expected to continue to have significant development over the next five years. This development will change the suburban character of the corridor into a more intense urban environment. The impact of new development upon this corridor will create a setting that commands the highest standards of development which encourage efficient use of land, promote coordinated development, permit innovative site designs, establish development standards and preserve the integrity of the roadways within this corridor. 
(c)  In addition thereto, State Route 92 traverse the City of Hiram, Georgia, beginning north of U. S. 278/GA 6 0.35 miles, running south ending at the intersection of Nebo Road. State Route 92 is heavily traveled and has varied new developments. The introduction of the Corridor Overlay District will encourage the development in this area to project a uniform, high-quality appearance. 
(d)  US Highway 278 is the most heavily traveled roadway in Paulding County, and is one of only two four-lane highways in the Paulding County, Georgia. It traverses the City of Hiram, Georgia, from the shared boarder of Powder Springs, Georgia, in Cobb County, Georgia, to the intersection of Palisades Parkway. US 278 travels through the City of Hiram, Georgia's, commercial center. As US 278 is considered by the Comprehensive Plan and associated Future Land Use Map, of Paulding County, Georgia, to be one of Paulding County, Georgia's, primary commercial corridors, future development of this highly visible corridor will dramatically change the image of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(e)  The East Hiram Parkway is a highway corridor which begins at the terminus of the Bill Carruth Parkway and continues through the eastern portion of Paulding County, Georgia, ending at the intersection of U. S. 278/GA 6, in the City of Hiram, Georgia. The portion of the roadway that lies in the jurisdiction of the City of Hiram, Georgia, begins at the intersection of U. S. 278/GA 6, running south ending 0.10 mile from U. S. 278/GA 6. The highway serves as both connector and bypass route. East Hiram Parkway is expected to have significant development over the next five years. This development will change the suburban character of the corridor into a more intense urban environment. The impact of new development upon this corridor will create a setting that commands the highest standards of development which encourage efficient use of land, promote coordinated development, permit innovative site designs, establish development standards and preserve the integrity of the roadways within this corridor. 
(f)  In addition thereto, all State Routes in the City of Hiram, Georgia, are designated as commercial areas in the Future Land Use Map and Comprehensive Plan, of Paulding County, Georgia. The City of Hiram, Georgia, does not have interstate access and therefore, the State Routes remain the only other viable commercial corridors. Thus, it is important that these areas develop in a consistent manner to ensure the highest standards of development which encourage efficient use of land, promote coordinated development, permit innovative site designs, establish development standards, and preserve the integrity of the roadways within this corridor. 
(g)  In recent years, Nebo Road has emerged as a mixed use corridor in the City of Hiram, Georgia, with commercial and residential developments throughout the length of the thruway. The City of Hiram, Georgia's, portion of Nebo Road extends from State Route 92 to Dallas Nebo Road. As Nebo Road continues to develop, it will be important to ensure continuity with design, quality, workmanship and materials in order to complete a visually pleasing development area. 
(h)  Based upon the data set forth above, the transportation corridors subject to these provisions are as follows: 
1.  State Route 120 a/k/a Marietta Highway 
2.  US Highway 278 
3.  State Route 92 a/k/a Hiram-Acworth Highway and Hiram-Douglasville Highway 
4.  Cleburne Parkway a/k/a East Hiram Parkway 
5.  Bill Carruth Parkway a/k/a West Hiram Parkway 
6.  Business Route SR 6 a/k/a Atlanta Highway 
7.  Nebo Road 
(5)  Title. This portion of the Zoning Ordinance, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall be known as the Corridor Overlay District, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. B. - Boundaries. 
(1)  General Provisions. The boundaries of the roadways set forth are located on either side of the centerline of the roadway and incorporate any parcel of land with right-of-way frontage on, or that is visible from the highway corridor. 
(2)  Roadways Named. The transportation corridors subject to these provisions are as follows: 
(a)  State Route 120 a/k/a Marietta Highway a/k/a Charles Hardy Parkway 
(b)  State Route 120 Connector a/k/a Hiram Sudie Road 
(c)  US Highway 278 
(d)  State Route 92 a/k/a Hiram-Acworth Highway and Hiram-Douglasville Highway 
(e)  East Hiram Parkway 
(f)  Bill Carruth Parkway a/k/a West Hiram Parkway 
(g)  Business Route SR 6 a/k/a Atlanta Highway 
(h)  Nebo Road 
For the purposes of this ordinance herein, these roadways and areas shall be collectively set forth as the "transportation corridors" in all definitions and sections herein below. 
Sec. C. - Department of community development approval. 
Authorization of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia and approval by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall be required for any proposed or revised development plan, or structure or structural alteration within the Corridor Overlay District. The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, approval of the architectural design, landscaping, sewerage, drainage, parking, signage, lighting, and access to the property shall be necessary prior to: 
(1)  The establishment of any use of the land; 
(2)  The issuance of any improvement location permit; 
(3)  The erection, construction, or structural alteration of any building(s) in the transportation corridors, as part of the Corridor Overlay District; or 
(4)  Modification or revision of any site development plan. 
Access to the property and sewerage service shall also require approval from the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, Paulding County Department of Transportation, of Paulding County, Georgia, Paulding County Water & Sewer System Department, of Paulding County, Georgia, the Department of Transportation, of the State of Georgia, and the Department of Environmental Health, of the State of Georgia. 
The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, in reviewing applications, shall examine factors concerning the site, site plan, and the surrounding area, which include but are not limited to the following items: 
(1)  Topography; 
(2)  Zoning on site; 
(3)  Surrounding zoning and existing land use; 
(4)  Streets, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks; 
(5)  Access to public streets; 
(6)  Driveway and curb cut locations in relation to other sites; 
(7)  General vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(8)  Internal site circulation including connectivity with adjoining parcels and developments; 
(9)  Special and general easements for public or private use; 
(10)  On-site and off-site surface and subsurface storm and water drainage; 
(11)  On-site and off-site utilities; 
(12)  The means and impact of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply technique; 
(13)  Dedication of City of Hiram, Georgia, approved streets and right-of-way; 
(14)  Protective restrictions or covenants and/or recorded commitments; 
(15)  Outdoor storage areas; 
(16)  Provisions for adequate and acceptable setbacks, lighting, signage, screening, landscaping, and compatibility with existing platted residential use; and 
(17)  Effects the proposed project may have on the entire Corridor Overlay District. 
In addition thereto, the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, at its discretion, may request and require architectural drawings, which are to be stamped/certified by a Professional Architect, licensed to work in the State of Georgia, and/or specific engineering plans, stamped by a Professional Engineer, licensed to work in the State of Georgia, for any and all buildings, outparcels or other such aspects of the site as the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, may deem necessary for its review of the application and development plans and proposal. 
Sec. D. - Building design standards. 
(1)  Architectural Design Requirements/Non-Residential. 
(a)  Exterior metal walls shall be prohibited on all buildings erected, constructed, altered, repaired or used in this Overlay Zone, which abut, are adjacent to or are visible to the transportation corridors. 
(b)  Building facades may be constructed from masonry or glass, as defined below or other materials or products which provide the same desired stability and quality. Products other than those listed below must be approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. (Please note: The building facades also includes all building sides which are visible from a Highway Corridor). 
1.  Masonry Construction: Which shall include all masonry construction that is composed of solid, faced, or veneered-wall construction with standard brick size (excluding masonry boards and cinder blocks, unless otherwise approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(i)  Stone material used for masonry construction may consist of granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, marble, or other hard or durable all weather stone. Ashlar, cut stone, and dimensioned stone construction techniques are acceptable. 
(ii)  Brick material used for masonry construction shall be composed of hard fired (Kiln-fired) all weather standard size brick, or other all weather facing brick. 
2.  Glass Walls: This shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall which carries no floor, or roof loads, and which may consist of a combination of metal, glass, and other surfacing materials supported in a metal framework. 
3.  Wood Construction. 
(c)  The materials and finishes of exposed roofs shall compliment those used for the exterior walls. Exposed roofs shall be defined as that portion of a roof visible from ground level of the corridor, or any adjacent public thoroughfare, or residentially zoned or used area. 
(d)  Roof mounted equipment on exposed roofs shall be screened from view. The appearance of roof screens shall be coordinated with the building to maintain a unified appearance. 
(e)  All building mechanical and electrical equipment located adjacent to the building and visible from a public thoroughfare or a residentially zoned or used area shall be screened from view. Such screens and enclosures shall be treated as an integral element of the building's appearance. 
(f)  The exposed walls and roofs of buildings shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and attractive condition; free of cracks, dents, punctures, breakage, and other forms of visible marring. Materials that become excessively faded, chalked or otherwise deteriorated shall be refinished, repainted, or replaced. 
(g)  Refuse and waste removal areas, loading berths, service yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from public ways. 
(2)  Relationship of Buildings to Site. 
(a)  The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking area. 
(b)  Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
(c)  Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, buildings wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as to attractively landscape and/or screen parking areas from view of public ways. 
(d)  Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
(e)  Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground. 
(3)  Minimum Building Height. 
(a)  All Transportation Corridors: All uses shall have a minimum building height of fourteen (14) feet with a minimum of twelve (12) feet to the lowest eaves for a building with a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. 
Sec. E. - Signage standards. 
Reserved. 
Sec. F. - Landscaping plan. 
(1)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development of Paulding County, Georgia and Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for their approval at the same time other plans (i.e. architectural design, lighting, parking, signage, and site plans) are submitted to Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, for Plan Review. This plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distance, shall delineate all existing and proposed structures, private parking areas, walks, ramps for handicapped, terraces, driveways, signs, lighting standards, steps, and other similar structures; and shall delineate the location, size, and description of all landscape materials. Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and private parking areas shall be designed as an integral and coordinated part of the landscape plan for the entire lot. Additional information may be requested by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, or the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for the filing of landscaping plans. 
(2)  Areas to be Landscaped: 
(a)  Greenbelt. 
(Non-Residential)—The Greenbelt (located on the front-side of buildings) shall be suitably landscaped and shall be otherwise unoccupied except for steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lighting standards, and other similar structures, but excluding private parking areas. The greenbelt shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide. Mounding and other innovative treatments are to be especially encouraged in this area. 
(Residential)—The Greenbelt shall include a 20-foot landscaped strip along the site's frontage along the corridor and other public roads excluding curb-cut right-of-way(s). Landscaping shall include evergreen trees, other acceptable vegetative material, berms, or a combination thereof. 
(b)  Peripheral Planting. There shall be peripheral landscaping strip, four (4) feet in depth, located along the side of any private parking area which abuts any front, side or rear property line. 
(c)  Planting Within Parking Lots. All parking lot landscaping shall be a quality to improve and enhance the site and its surrounding area. Effective use of mounding and existing topography is encouraged. Landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking area, and not less than five (5) percent of a private parking lot shall be landscaped. (For purposes of this computation, landscaping in: (1) the Greenbelt (adjacent to buildings); and (2) on the periphery of the lot shall not be included. Landscaping shall be specifically provided at the ends of parking rows and as a means of separating parking from major circulation isles within lots. 
(3)  Landscaping Standards. 
(a)  The interior dimensions, specifications and design of any planting area or planting medium proposed to be constructed shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials planted therein and to provide for proper growth, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(b)  Primary landscaping materials used in the Greenbelt and adjacent to buildings shall consist of one or a combination of the following, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager: shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, mulches, etc. 
(c)  The primary landscaping materials used in and around private parking areas shall be trees, which provide shade at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges, and other planting material may be used to compliment tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(d)  All shade trees proposed to be used in accordance with any landscaping plan shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in overall height and have a minimum trunk diameter, twelve (12) inches above the ground of two (2) inches upon planting. They should be of a variety which will attain an average mature spread greater than twenty (20) feet. The types of trees shall be those specified in the Buffer Sections of the Zoning Ordinance—Article VI, Section E, (4) Standards, (1). 
(e)  Landscaping materials selected should be appropriate to local growing and climatic conditions. Wherever appropriate existing trees should be conserved and integrated into the landscaping plan. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, color and for its ultimate growth. Indigenous and other hardy plants that are harmonious to the design and of good appearance shall be used, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(f)  The landscaping plan shall ensure that sight distances are not obstructed for drivers of motor vehicles. 
(g)  Where natural or existing topography patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to topography shall be permitted where it contributes to good appearance, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(h)  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(i)  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthening vistas and important axis, and provide shade. Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, and Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(j)  Unity of designs shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(k)  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrians or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(l)  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(m)  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
(n)  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and paving applications of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
(o)  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(p)  Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings and sign, as approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(4)  Landscaping Installation and Maintenance. 
(a)  Installation. All landscaping required by the approved landscaping plan shall be installed prior to the issuance of a building certificate of occupancy permit if said permit is issued during a planting season, or within six (6) months of the date an occupancy permit is issued during a non-planting season. If not planted, a bond shall be required for plantings for a period of 1 year (12-months) from date of certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and their agencies to insure proper maintenance of the landscaping, in accordance with the standards set by this Ordinance and as indicated on the landscaping plan, which has been approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. This is to include, but not limited to, replaced dead plantings with identical varieties or a suitable substitute, and keeping the area free of refuse and debris. 
(c)  Changes after Approval. No landscaping which has been approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, may later be altered, eliminated, or sacrificed, without first obtaining further approval from the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(d)  Inspection. The Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager shall have the authority to visit any lot within the Corridor Overlay Zone to inspect the landscaping and check it against the approved plan on file. 
Sec. G. - Sidewalk requirements. 
The installation of sidewalks and crosswalks in all developments, residential and commercial, shall be required for developments subject to this ordinance. The sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be subject to review and approval by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, as to size, location, design and materials during the plan review process. 
Sec. H. - Parking requirements. 
Efforts to break up large expanse of pavement are to be encouraged by the interspersing of appropriate planting areas wherever possible. The number of parking spaces required is established in Article VII of the Zoning Ordinance, depending upon the zoning and the intended land use. Alternatives to the established parking requirements may be granted to developments which have a mixture of uses whose peak parking requirements do not coincide in time and thereby may share parking spaces. The applicant shall provide expertly prepared justification for seeking such exception (i.e., a reference such as "shared parking," Urban Land Institute). There shall be an appropriate number of parking spaces, accessible to the building(s) and identification as reserved for use by handicapped individuals, and these spaces shall be of sufficient width to accommodate their needs. All Parking standards shall comply with Article VII of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. I. - Lighting requirements. 
In reviewing the lighting plan for a lot proposed to be developed in the Corridor Overlay District, factors to be considered by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Safety provided by the lighting; 
(2)  Security provided by the lighting; 
(3)  Possible light spillage or glare onto adjoining properties or streets. (Down-shielding is encouraged and spillage or glare onto adjoining properties is prohibited); 
(4)  Attractiveness of the lighting standards and their compatibility with the overall treatment of the property; 
(5)  Height and placement of lighting standards considering the use (maximum height of 30 feet); and 
(6)  Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and building fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design and excessive brightness avoided. 
Sec. J. - Access to individual sites. 
The transportation corridors by their functional nature as primary thoroughfares must have reasonable restrictions as to the number and location of access points within the overlay zones. 
All roadways listed as transportation corridors represent major thoroughfares, which must be controlled as to the number of access points (curb cuts) permitted. 
Therefore, in order to provide safe and sufficient traffic movement to and from adjacent lands and to protect the functional integrity of the corridors primary thoroughfares, in many cases frontage roads, access roads, and distributors roads, will have to be built. Such roads shall be coordinated with those of contiguous lots, and designed to preserve the aesthetic benefits provided by the greenbelt areas. Access at the side or rear of buildings is encouraged. New access points onto the primary thoroughfares in the corridor shall be coordinated with existing access points whenever possible. The following curb cut policy shall apply throughout all corridors: 
Access to proposed developments shall be provided per the Department of Transportation, of the State of Georgia, and/or the Department of Transportation, of Paulding County, Georgia, access management standards, policies, guidelines and regulations. 
Sec. K. - Access to potential development sites. 
Stub streets shall be built in all cases where adjacent lots have reasonable potential for development. Reasonable potential shall include any adjacent parcel of adequate size for commercial or residential development, or any adjacent parcel so determined by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, in association with the Department of Transportation, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. L. - Other standards. 
(1)  Outside Storage Prohibited. (Seasonal Sales) No outside, unenclosed storage of refuse (whether or not in containers) or display of merchandise shall be permitted on any lot. All refuse shall be contained completely within the principal or accessory building(s). Exceptions to this requirement will be made on a case-by-case basis by the Board of Zoning Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, using the variance procedure outlined in Article XV. Seasonal sales are allowed four times a year with written approval from the Department of Community Development Director, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, for a maximum of 30-days. Outdoor sales (if allowed by the underlying zoning district) must be covered. Examples of coverings include but are not limited to tents and awnings. 
(2)  Loading Berth Requirements. Loading berth requirements shall be as specified in the underlying zone district(s), except that any loading or unloading berth or bay shall be screened from view beyond the site by landscaping or other screening. 
(3)  Accessory Buildings and Uses. All accessory buildings and uses which are permitted in the underlying zoning district(s) shall be permitted within the Corridor Overlay District, except that any detached accessory building on any lot shall be designed to be architecturally designed and constructed with the same material as the principal building as to be compatible with the principal building which it is associated. All accessory building shall have a roof. 
(4)  Paving Requirements. All parking areas shall be finished with a hard surface such as asphalt, concrete or other materials approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager. 
(5)  [Underground Utilities.] All utilities including but not limited to electric, cable, and phone services shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, in coordination with the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, after written submittal providing justification for overhead utility services. 
(6)  Temporary or Seasonal Event/Sales. Temporary or seasonal event/sales are allowed along the highway corridor on a case-by-case basis for a maximum of four times per year with written approval from the Operations Manager Office, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for a maximum of 30 days. Request for temporary or seasonal event/sales shall be made in writing, accompanied by a recorded plat of the site, and written permission by the property owner to the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, recognizing the activity as one of their allotted events/sales for the year. A valid Occupational Tax Certificate, issued by the City of Hiram, Georgia, is required of all approved temporary or seasonal event/sale locations. 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. A. - Enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Operations Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, and enforced in coordination with the Police Department, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, with the powers provided in the laws of the State of Georgia and in the charter and resolutions of the City of Hiram, Georgia. For the purpose of serving citations for violations of this Ordinance, such citations may be referred to the Police Department, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for service which shall be heard and determined in the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia which decision of the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia may be appealed, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of such decision to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. B. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to commence the construction of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, in the City of Hiram, Georgia, which requires a permit in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia, until a permit for such work has been issued, by the Department of Community Development, Permit Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. C. - Application for building permit. 
All applications to the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan and survey, as applicable; however, accessory buildings located in agriculture and residential areas may be excluded if setbacks and other requirements can be determined. The site plan or survey must include: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The size of the building to be erected; 
(3)  The location of the building on the lot; 
(4)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(5)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(6)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots; 
(7)  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; 
(8)  Such other information as may be requested for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed; and 
(9)  Such other information as may be requested by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager; and 
(10)  Certification by the applicant that he has complied, or will comply with the applicable regulations, and ordinances of the State of Georgia, concerning environment and health, the Development Regulations, of Paulding County, Georgia, flood ordinance, and all other applicable ordinances of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. D. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or any agent, servant, employee, officer, or contractor for any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, per violation. Each day of any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. The violation of any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this Ordinance shall also constitute a nuisance and any person aggrieved thereby may abate the same or the same may be abated as a public nuisance. Continuous violation thereof may be restrained in the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia or in a court of equity having jurisdiction thereof, and such remedy shall not be the exclusive remedy for any violation. 
Sec. E. - Prosecution. 
Upon citation by the City of Hiram, Georgia Police Department, any violations of this Ordinance shall be adjudicated and determined by the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it is filed with the Clerk of the Municipal Court, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date which citation was issued, and shall be signed by the police officer, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, who issues such citation. The Prosecutor of the Municipal Court of the City of Hiram, Georgia and/or the City Attorney of the City of Hiram, Georgia shall prosecute any such citation on behalf of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
ARTICLE XV. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. A. - Authorization of the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, is hereby authorized to hear initial appeals and variance requests, on behalf of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and make recommendation to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. All motions to recommend actions on applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall be forwarded to the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, to be appropriately advertised and presented at the public hearing, before the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, prior to final consideration at their next regularly scheduled meeting. 
Sec. B. - Proceedings of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals conduct meetings, in the manner set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of Paulding County, Georgia, Article XV, Section B, with regard to structure of the Zoning Board of Appeals, schedule of meetings, recorded minutes of all meetings, and the public meetings requirement. The City of Hiram, Georgia, understands that the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall adopt such rules and by-laws as they deem appropriate, for their functions and operations. 
Sec. C. - Powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Appeal of Administrative Decision. To hear and gather information, regarding appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, or Zoning Administrator, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Hearing of Requests for Variances to Terms of this Ordinance. To recommend to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be recommended to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding of the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia that: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, character, topography, and 
(b)  The application of this zoning ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship, and 
(c)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, and 
(d)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
(3)  Provided, however, that no variance shall be recommended to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for a use of land, or building, or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance. 
(4)  In exercising the powers in this section conferred upon it, the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, may recommend the reversal, or affirmation, wholly, or partly, or may recommend the modification of the orders, requirements, decisions, or determinations appealed from; and to that end shall have all the authority to request information from the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue a recommendation regarding the issuance of a permit, to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. D. - Appeals, hearings, and notice. 
(1)  Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Hiram, Georgia, affected by any decision of the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, or the Zoning Administrator, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days by filing with the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(2)  Applications for a variance must be filed on forms provided by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, according to the schedule established by the Division. Applications shall be submitted and the following provided at the date of filing: 
(a)  A completed application form signed by the owner and the applicant. 
(b)  Warranty deed or other proof of ownership of the property and documentation by the Tax Commissioner, of Paulding County, Georgia that the ad valorem taxes levied against the property have been paid. 
(c)  A survey plat of the property (number of copies as specified by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia) which demonstrates a true and accurate boundary of the property and illustrates the variance requested, prepared by a Registered Surveyor, licensed to operate by the State of Georgia, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage, and location of the tract. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat. Indicate on the plat structures which are currently located on the property and depict the variance requested on the plat to scale. 
(d)  The names and mailing addresses of all adjoining property owners, including the owners across the road, and to the rear. 
(e)  The filing fee as set by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(f)  Such other additional information as may be requested by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, in the Procedures for the Filing of Applications. 
(3)  Prior to the date of the hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Hiram, Georgia, in which are carried the legal advertisements of the City of Hiram, Georgia or Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. E. - Decisions of the Board of Appeals. 
(1)  In exercising its powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, recommend reversal or affirmation, wholly or partly, or may recommend modification of the orders, requirements, decisions, or determinations, to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and may recommend issuance of a building permit, upon approval by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(2)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members present of the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall be necessary to recommend the reversal of any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, or the Zoning Administrator, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or to make a recommendation in favor of the applicant and forward such result to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for further consideration, with the approved recommendations. 
(3)  On all appeals, applications, and other matters brought before the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, said Board shall inform the applicant of its recommendations, and decisions and the reasons therefore. The Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, will instruct parties with interest in all appeals, applications, and other matters brought before the board that all recommendations will be forward to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for the required, and appropriately advertised, legal public hearing, and the final decision on all matters. 
Sec. F. - Conduct of hearing. 
(1)  The conduct of hearings before the body of the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall be governed by the requirements stipulated in the approved Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hiram, Georgia, as adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(2)  All motions regarding recommendations for applications pertaining to the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall be forwarded to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for the purposes of conducting the required legally advertised public hearing, for zoning matters. 
(3)  The recommendations that are forwarded to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, from the Zoning Board of Appeals, of Paulding County, Georgia, will be heard the day of the next regular session of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, if there is enough time for the City to meet the advertising requirement for zoning hearings, as stipulated by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(a)  Anyone in attendance at the public hearing wishing to speak on behalf or in opposition to applications that are on the agenda must be recognized and they will be asked to state their name and place of residence, and then asked if they had signed in prior to the start of the meeting on a sheet provided by the staff. 
(b)  The person recognized to speak will be allowed to speak on any point relevant to the petition being considered. Applicants and opponents shall be given a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes each to present their case. Any groups which are present are encouraged to choose a spokesperson to present their views. The Mayor, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may request representatives of each side to speak for the entire group. If more than one (1) speaker represents a group, the fifteen (15) minutes shall be divided among the various speakers. Speakers are encouraged to refrain from presenting information that has previously been stated by others. In no case, however, shall any group be allowed more than the allotted time no matter how many speakers represent the group unless extended by consent of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The Clerk of the City of Hiram, Georgia, will be responsible for keeping time. 
(c)  Proposals for each Agenda item should be presented orally to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and/or their Representative. 
(d)  During and following the Applicant's presentation, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may ask any pertinent questions of the Applicant, or their Representative to aid in their understanding of the case. 
(e)  After such presentation, and discussion with the Applicant, the Mayor, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall ask if there be anyone present who is present in opposition to the granting of such request. 
(f)  Those appearing in opposition may offer oral evidence, and any documentation to demonstrate their position. 
(g)  During and following the presentation of those in opposition to the application or proposal, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may ask any pertinent questions of the Opposition to aid in their understanding of the case. Questions and responses shall not be counted as part of the maximum fifteen (15) minute presentation time limit. 
(h)  No further public input will be allowed without consent of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(i)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Mayor, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, will announce the public hearing closed. 
(4)  Once the public hearing has taken place, the item may be taken up for consideration by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, during the same regular session of the Council, unless tabled or postponed by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
If the zoning item is tabled or postponed, the item will be forwarded to the next regular session of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The Mayor will announce this action to the public during the meeting, along with the reasons for this action. No further advertising will be required. 
Sec. G. - Appeals from decisions of the board. 
Any person, or persons severally, or jointly aggrieved by any final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any final decision of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may file an appeal in writing to the Superior Court, of Paulding County, Georgia. Said written appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or any final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals; and upon failure to file said written appeal within thirty (30) days the final decision of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. 
Sec. H. - Administrative variances. 
The Department of Community Development Director, of Paulding County, Georgia, with the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall have the power to grant variances (except for density and use variances) from the dimensional standards of the ordinance where, in their opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street—variance not to exceed five (5) feet. 
(2)  Side yard—variance not to exceed three (3) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard—variance not to exceed five (5) feet. 
(4)  Height—variance not to equal or exceed ten (10) feet, provided that no variance may result in an increase in the number of stories than would otherwise be allowed under the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  A reduction of the minimum number of required parking spaces up to a maximum of ten percent (10%). 
(6)  A reduction of the minimum distance to any property line for animal quarters (agricultural facilities, kennels, etc.) up to a maximum of fifty (50) feet. 
The Department of Community Development Director, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall not have the authority to grant any additional administrative variances after a variance has been approved by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
ARTICLE XVI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. A. - Planning Commission to propose or review amendments. 
This Ordinance, including the comprehensive land use map, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the official zoning map(s), of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may be amended by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, on its own motion, or on recommendation of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, but no amendment shall become effective, unless it has been proposed by, or has first been submitted to the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment, public notice shall be given and a public hearing held as required herein. 
Sec. B. - Initiation of amendments. 
(1)  Applications to amend this Ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text or the official zoning maps. 
(a)  An application to amend the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or be submitted to the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or by any person having an interest in the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(b)  An application to amend the official zoning map may be initiated by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or may be submitted to the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or may be submitted by any person having an interest in the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(2)  Unless initiated by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, all applications (rezoning, land use, special use, or medical hardships) must be submitted by the owner of the affected property, or the authorized agent of the owner. If submitted by an agent of the owner, such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. 
An application may be withdrawn without prejudice at any time prior to the date scheduled for the hearing by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. Unless withdrawn at the hearing, the withdrawal must be in writing, signed and dated by the applicant. If an application is withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this Article shall have first appeared, the cost of the advertising and any other expenses incurred may be deducted from any refund of fees. 
The applicant, or his/her representative, must be present at the hearing, or the application may not be heard. 
Sec. C. - Applications for amendments. 
Applications for text amendments, rezonings, land use permits, special use permits, and/or medical hardships shall be filed with all accompanying documents with the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, in accordance with the filing deadline established by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. Application fees are non-refundable and are established by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia, and made available by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia, or the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. Applications shall be submitted and the following provided at the date of filing: 
(1)  Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
(a)  Name and current address of the applicant; 
(b)  Current provisions of the text to be affected by the amendment; 
(c)  Proposed wording of text change; and 
(d)  Reason for the amendment request. 
(2)  Applications for rezoning, special use permits, and land use permits shall contain the following: 
(a)  A completed application form signed by the owner and the applicant (if applicable). 
(b)  A warranty deed or other proof of ownership of the property. 
(c)  Documentation by the Tax Commissioner, of Paulding County, Georgia that the ad valorem taxes, levied against the property, have been paid. 
(d)  A legal description of the tract of property. 
(e)  A survey plat of the property which demonstrates a true and accurate boundary of the property, prepared by a Surveyor, Registered with the State of Georgia, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
(f)  A site development plan prepared by a Surveyor, Registered with the State of Georgia, Engineer, Land Planner, or Architect (with preparer's seal affixed) drawn to scale of the subject property, including proposed building locations, proposed use of the property within the requested zoning classification, parking areas, access points, creeks, streams, flood plain, etc., and any buffers that may be required (number of copies specified by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, in addition to the one required by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram). The applicant may also furnish additional material which may aid in the understanding of the request. 
(g)  The names and mailing addresses of all adjoining property owners, including the owners across the road and to the rear. 
(h)  The filing fee as set by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia or the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(i)  Such other additional information as may be requested by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, in the Procedures for the Filing of Applications, located in the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(3)  Applications for medical hardships shall contain the following: 
(a)  A completed application form signed by the owner, the applicant, and the person with the medical hardship. 
(b)  A warranty deed or other proof of ownership of the property. 
(c)  Documentation by the Tax Commissioner, of Paulding County, Georgia that the ad valorem taxes, levied against the property, have been paid. 
(d)  A legal description of the tract of property. 
(e)  A current survey plat of the property (number of copies specified by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, in addition to the one required by the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager) prepared by a Surveyor, Registered with the State of Georgia, whose state registration is current and valid, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat. Indicate on the plat structures which are currently located on the property (such as house or storage building) and indicate on the plat where the mobile home will be positioned. 
(f)  The names and mailing addresses of all adjoining property owners, including the owners across the road and to the rear. 
(g)  The filing fee as set by the Board of Commissioners, of Paulding County, Georgia or the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(h)  An original, notarized doctor's certificate stating the name of the person with the medical hardship, a description of the physical condition, and explanation of why the person needs to live in close proximity to receive care, and any other evidence to support the medical hardship application. 
(i)  Such other additional information as may be requested by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, and/or the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, in the Procedures for the Filing of Applications, located in the Department of Community Development, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(4)  If an application is withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this Article shall have first appeared, the cost of advertisement and any other expenses incurred may be deducted from any refund of fees. 
(5)  With respect to amendments to the official zoning map, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, an applicant may file renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions, and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application; provided, however, that such conditions, or alterations, or changes thereto shall be filed with the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, Zoning Administrator, of Paulding County, Georgia, at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing before the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. If such conditions, or alterations, or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this paragraph, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date which will permit the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, to conduct another hearing to consider the applicant's proposal prior to consideration of the application by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
At the hearing in which the deferral is granted, the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall specify the month of the published scheduled hearing before the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the subsequent hearing before the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, and this action shall constitute public notice of such hearings and no additional notices shall be required prior to the hearings so scheduled by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The date designated for action on the application shall be set at a time which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this paragraph. 
(6)  An application for rezoning, special use permit, land use permit, or medical hardship may be forwarded by the applicant from its scheduled public hearing date to the next available public hearing date with the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, a maximum of two (2) times. The request to forward an application must be written with the applicant's (or representative's) signature and submitted to the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, prior to the hearing date. Each request must include the application number, explanation for the request to forward the application, and date of the next scheduled public hearing, at which the application will be considered by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. Payment of an additional application fee in the full amount of the original application fee is required upon written request to forward the application in order to pay for the additional costs associated therewith. 
Applications which must be forwarded as a result of the actions, or omissions of the Applicant, resulting in an incomplete or deficient application will also be subject to the payment of the additional application fee in the full amount of the original application. Payment is due immediately upon the forwarding of said deficient application. 
Applications that are forwarded by the Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, or at the request of the Operations Manager, of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the City Manager of the City of Hiram, Georgia or the Temporary City Manager, or Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division staff, of Paulding County, Georgia, will not be considered as a applicant's request to forward an application and no additional fees will be due. 
Sec. D. - Planning Commission action. 
(1)  This Zoning Ordinance, including the zoning map, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may be amended from time to time by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by, or shall first have been submitted to, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, for review and recommendation. 
(2)  The Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall be allowed to hold its public hearing for an application and to table its recommendation until the next scheduled meeting for the purpose of considering more information. If the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, fails to submit a recommendation at its next scheduled meeting, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. The amendment will then be forwarded to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, for their public hearing, and final consideration. 
Sec. E. - Public notification. 
(1)  Legal Notice. Before the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, takes action on any proposed amendment, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days, prior to the date of the hearing, a notice of the hearing shall be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Hiram, Georgia, in which are carried the legal advertisements of the City of Hiram, Georgia. This notice shall state the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing. If a rezoning application is initiated by a party other than the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, the notice of hearing as provided herein shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(2)  Sign(s) Posted. A sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location on the property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. The sign shall state the time, date, and place of the hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Such signs shall be visible from each public right-of-way fronting the property. The sign will include the time, date, and place of the public hearing on the application, by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
(3)  Letters to Property Owners. The Department of Community Development, Planning and Zoning Division, of Paulding County, Georgia, must notify in writing all owners of property abutting any tract or lot for which a rezoning has been filed in accordance with the list of owners provided by the applicant of the nature of the request and the date of the hearing before the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. This notification is in addition to and not in lieu of, any other notice or publication required under this Ordinance. 
Sec. F. - Conduct of hearing. 
(1)  The public hearing of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia shall be held at regularly scheduled meetings, such meetings to be held at a time, place, and date as prescribed according to a schedule which shall be approved and adopted as provided in subsection 5 of Section 16 of the Code of Ordinances, of Paulding County, Georgia. The public hearing shall be presided over by the Chairman of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, or another officer of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, in the absence of the Chairman. A secretary shall be present at all public hearings to take minutes. 
(2)  The Chairman, or any other Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, member or the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia shall review the following procedures that will be adhered to during the public hearing: 
(a)  Anyone in attendance at the public hearing wishing to speak on behalf or in opposition to petitions that are on the agenda must be recognized and they will be asked to state their name and place of residence, and then to sign his or her name on a sheet provided by the staff. 
(b)  The person recognized to speak will be allowed to speak on any point relevant to the petition being considered. Applicants and opponents shall be given a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes each to present their case. Any groups which are present are encouraged to choose a spokesperson to present their views. The Chairman, of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, may request representatives of each side to speak for the entire group. If more than one (1) speaker represents a group, the fifteen (15) minutes shall be divided among the various speakers. Speakers are encouraged to refrain from presenting information that has previously been stated by others. In no case, however, shall any group be allowed more than the allotted times, no matter how many speakers represent the group, unless extended by the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. A designated staff member will be responsible for keeping time. 
(c)  Proposals for each Agenda item should be presented orally to the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and to a representative, if available, of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, by Applicant(s), and/or their Representative, along with any documentation necessary to demonstrate the justification for such request. 
(d)  During and following the Applicant's presentation, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the representative of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may ask any pertinent questions of the Applicant, or their Representative to aid in their understanding of the case. 
(e)  After such presentation, and discussion with the Applicant, the Chairman of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, shall ask if there be anyone present who is present in opposition to the granting of such request. 
(f)  Those appearing in opposition may offer oral evidence and any documentation to demonstrate their position. 
(g)  During and following the presentation of those in opposition to the application or proposal, the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, and the representative, if available, of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, may ask any pertinent questions of the Opposition to aid in their understanding of the case. Questions and responses shall not be counted as part of the maximum fifteen (15) minute presentation time limit. 
(h)  No further public input will be allowed without consent of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(i)  At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Chairman of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, will cause to be forwarded to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, recommendation of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, concerning each application, pertaining to the City of Hiram, Georgia. The Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall hold its public hearing, and then make its final determination at a future meeting of the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. The public hearing, of the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, is concluded at the time the Planning Commission, of Paulding County, Georgia, makes its recommendation to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. G. - Zoning review standards. 
Any proposed rezoning will be evaluated using the following zoning review standards: 
(1)  Existing land use and zoning classification of nearby property. 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(5)  Whether the proposed use is supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan, of Paulding County, Georgia, or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties; and 
(6)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the Comprehensive Plan, of Paulding County, Georgia. 
Sec. H. - Decision by Hiram City Council. 
The Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall also hold a public hearing at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the body, with notice as required by Section E of Article XVI once the application/amendment has been forwarded to the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. Once the public hearing has been held the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, shall address the applications and may approve, deny, or table the applications using the same standards and criteria as set forth herein. An action by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application(s) will be considered, which shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application(s) and no further notice shall be required. If an application for a rezoning is denied, no re-application shall be allowed until twelve (12) months have passed from the date of final decision by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia. 
Sec. I. - Site plan amendment. 
(1)  At the time the site is developed, if the submitted site plan reflects a proposed use which is an allowable use within the specified zoning district, but differs from that approved by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, at the time of the rezoning action, then the site plan shall be reviewed again by all applicable City of Hiram, Georgia/Paulding County, Georgia, departments, as well as, applicable State of Georgia, and/or Federal agencies. 
(2)  At the time the site is developed, if the submitted site plan deviates significantly, as determined by City of Hiram, Georgia/Paulding County, Georgia, staff, from the site plan which was approved by the Mayor and Council, of the City of Hiram, Georgia, at the time of the rezoning action, the site plan shall be reviewed by all applicable City of Hiram, Georgia/Paulding County, Georgia, departments, as well as, applicable State of Georgia, and/or Federal agencies. 
(3)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia is authorized to make final approval or disapproval/denial of the amended site plan referred to above. If an amended site plan is disapproved/denied, an appeal may be made in writing within thirty (30) days of the final denial/disapproval by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hiram, Georgia of such site plan amendment to the Superior Court of Paulding County, Georgia. 
(4)  All site plans are subject to the plan review standards established by the City of Hiram, Georgia/Paulding County, Georgia. 
ARTICLE XVII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. A. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or require a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards that are required in or under any other ordinance or statute, the regulations and requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. 
Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. B. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. C. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare of the City of Hiram, Georgia, demanding. 
Appendix B - FEES AND FINES 
The fees and fines schedule for the City of Hiram, as set forth in Ord. No. 2013-8, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 6, 2013, and amended from time to time, is adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. A current copy of this schedule is kept on file in the offices of the city and available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1965 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1965 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1996 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1996 Code, as updated through September 4, 2012, which are included herein. Sections of the 1996 Code, as updated through September 4, 2012, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 