THE CODE OF THE CITY OF MILNER, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 25, 2008 
Effective: February 25, 2008 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MILNER, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joe C. Bostwick 
Mayor 
____________ 
Warner J. Morgan 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
James Bevil 
Fred Stephens 
George S. Weldon 
Betty T. Wilson 
Council 
____________ 
Robert H. Wilson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Sandra Y. Smith 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Newton Galloway 
City Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MILNER, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Joe C. Bostwick 
Mayor 
____________ 
Fred Stephens 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
James Bevil 
Bridget Fouts 
Fred Stephens 
George S. Weldon 
Betty T. Wilson 
Council 
____________ 
Robert H. Wilson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Sandra Y. Smith 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Scott Mayfield 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the prior Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Kimberly Wodrich, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. R. Harold Wilson, City Administrator, and Mr. Newton Galloway, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Milner, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Milner, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Milner, Georgia. 2008. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-2 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MILNER, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
IT SHALL BE AND IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MILNER, GEORGIA: 
Section 1: The Code entitled "Code of the City of Milner, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 118, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2: Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00. Except as otherwise provided, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense and with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement or nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 3: All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before the date on which this ordinance is read for the second time, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 4: The repeal provided for in Section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 5: Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6: Ordinances adopted after April 18, 2007, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7: This ordinance shall take effect on adoption by the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner. 
SIGNED: 

ATTESTED: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 535), page 5224. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation has been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and citations to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. In addition, the title of the act and ordaining clause have been deleted. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The city and the inhabitants thereof are re-incorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Milner, Georgia, in the County of Lamar, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. Under that name, the city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Milner shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Milner, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Milner, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. The city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1.13. - Specific powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Milner, to be exercised by the governing authority, include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To establish minimum standards for and to regulate the erection, construction, and repair of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes, to regulate all housing, building, and building trades, to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions, as authorized by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. tit. 22, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of this state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  General welfare. To make, ordain, and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules, and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(13)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, under such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(14)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(15)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, squares, and other public property in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(16)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(17)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(18)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(19)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(20)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(21)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewerage disposal, gasworks, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting charges for such services and for enforcing payment of same; charges for such services shall constitute a lien against the property receiving such services and shall be enforced in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes; 
(22)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen or in any other manner provided by the general laws of the State of Georgia; and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(27)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(28)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(29)  Public peace. To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, riots, public drunkenness, the playing of lotteries, and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city; and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within the city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(30)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(31)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services companies, not to exceed periods of 50 years; or to impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations by the public service commission; 
(32)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(33)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(34)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way through the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities and public services and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(35)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service charge, fee, or sewer tax for the availability or the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(36)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(37)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(38)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements; 
(39)  Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(40)  Taxes; other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(41)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(42)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(43)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia, 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 2.10. - Creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Milner, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The city council so established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office, change of residency to outside of the city, or occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. tit. 45, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilmember shall forfeit his or her office if he or she: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his or her term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; or 
(2)  Is convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by an election as provided in section 5.15 of this Charter if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term; otherwise by an election, as provided for in section 5.15 of this Charter and in accordance with O.C.G.A. tits. 21 and 45, or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by resolution or ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of the official or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by such government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in the city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General powers and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Milner as provided by article I. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the city council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Milner and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  By ordinance, the city council may create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization on the second Wednesday in January each year. 
The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: "I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember or officer as the case may be) of the city; that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America; and that I will to the utmost of my skill and ability promote the interest and prosperity of the city." 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or via electronic mail, provided that a delivery and read receipt notice is received at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairs and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of a majority of councilmembers and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor or mayor pro tempore and any three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote or as otherwise designated by the mayor, and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of the majority of the councilmembers present and voting excluding the mayor, except in the case of a tie, shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. In the event any councilmember or the mayor leaves the meeting after the motion is made, but before the motion is decided, he or she shall not be deemed absent for quorum purposes and shall be assigned an official vote. 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The City Council of the City of Milner hereby ordains" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in section 2.24 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(c)  All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
(d)  Whenever possible, ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection 2.22(b) of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to subsection 2.26(b) of this Charter. Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.26. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council; and 
(1)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the clerk to the mayor. 
(2)  The mayor, within five business days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk with his or her approval, or with his or her disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk. If the ordinance is not returned to the clerk, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the fifth business day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the clerk a written statement of the reasons for his or her veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Milner, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.27. - City administrator; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city administrator for an indefinite term and shall fix the administrator's compensation. The administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The city council shall, by ordinance, enumerate the powers and duties of the city administrator. 
Sec. 2.28. - City council interference with administrator. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.15 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the administrator solely through the administrator, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.29. - Election of mayor. 
The mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this Charter. 
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Have the right, as shall the mayor pro tempore, while acting as mayor, to vote on all questions before the council to break ties; 
(6)  Establish committees and appoint members, subject to the approval of a majority of the council; 
(7)  Act as liaison between the council and the city administrator; and 
(8)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. 
Sec. 2.31. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in section 2.14 of this Charter. 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH ORGANIZATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelected offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city administrator, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors under the supervision of the city administrator shall be nominated by the city administrator with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointive officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time at the recommendation of the city administrator and by a resolution adopted by a majority vote of the city council, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by resolution or ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that member's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All board members serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of four members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of the city clerk, city tax collector, and city accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The city administrator may, with the approval of the city council, perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same. 
Sec. 3.15. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city administrator shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.16. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of any position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; and 
(4)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Milner. 
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Milner. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  With the exception of the Lamar County Probate Judge, no person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council required in section 2.20 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be declared forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of this state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Lamar County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and upon request a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots. 
By ordinance, the city council may prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in the City of Milner. 
Sec. 5.12. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers at one election and at every other regular election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. Terms shall be for four years. 
Sec. 5.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed alphabetically and without party designations. 
Sec. 5.14. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5.15. - Special elections, vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.16. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
Sec. 5.17. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in O.C.G.A tit. 45 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Lamar County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Lamar County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Milner. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 

Sec. 6.10. - Property taxes. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within the city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.19 if this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Transfer of executions. 
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of fi. fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title, and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Provided that upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his or her right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fas., as such requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law. 
Sec. 6.19. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.20. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any projects, programs, or ventures authorized under this Charter or the general laws of this state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.21. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.22. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.23. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the city at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13 or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.24. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Such fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, or institution, agency, and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Sec. 6.25. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.26. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city administrator containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.27. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city administrator. However, the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first regular meeting in January of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.25 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.28. - Property tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of Milner. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Milner. 
Sec. 6.29. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special, or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.30. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 90 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvement plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt, by ordinance, the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first regular meeting of January of each year. No appropriation provided for in a capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city administrator may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.31. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
Sec. 6.32. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney, and as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.33. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.34. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city administrator and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city administrator to sell and convey such cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of such street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase such property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE  ACTS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 471), page 3475. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE  ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Charter of ordinances amendatory thereto. 

 
Sec. 7.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Milner, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 90 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Sec. 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Milner in the County of Lamar (Ga. L. 1969, p. 3475) is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 7.18. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Milner, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Prior Code, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the mayor and council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Milner, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows; provided, in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Lamar County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and council of the City of Milner, Georgia, being the governing body of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural. Words used in the plural include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, courts, alleys, lanes, circles, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italic, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Prior Code, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Prior Code, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "Section _______ of The Code of the City of Milner, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ________ (set out new provisions in full)". 
(c)  When the mayor and council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the mayor and council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section _______. It is the intention of the mayor and council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and made a part of The Code of the City of Milner, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Prior Code, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Prior Code, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-8. - Fines for traffic and other offenses. 
The traffic fines enforced by the city have met the laws of the state and the codes of law enforcement. The fines have been set according to O.C.G.A. Title 15, Chapter 21 (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-1 et seq.) The recommended traffic fines are listed below as follows: 

 
(Prior Code, § 30-3; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 12-3-2018) 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or approving any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Any ordinance providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no-parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code. 
(11)  Levying taxes that are not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Adopting or amending specifications water, sewers, streets and other public improvements. 
(13)  Rezoning specific property. 
(14)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(15)  That is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-40. - Meetings. 
The mayor and council shall meet at the council chamber on the third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the mayor and council. Regular mayor and council meetings shall be advertised in the local newspaper, television and radio at all possible cost, in a period of no less than 15 calendar days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting. Called or emergency meetings for the mayor and council must give notice no less than 24 hours prior to such meeting. Notice should be posted on the premises of the city hall and all other city owned facilities. 
(Prior Code, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-41. - Minutes of previous meeting. 
The presiding officer, whether the mayor, mayor pro tem, or a councilmember, shall call the meeting to order at the designated hour; the clerk shall, upon the appearance of a quorum, read the minutes of the preceding meeting. After said minutes have been corrected or amended, should the same be necessary, they shall be put upon their approval, and when approved, shall be signed by the mayor and the clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-42. - Adjournment; special meetings. 
The mayor and council may be adjourned to any fixed time. Special meetings may be called by the mayor whenever dire circumstances require it, and he shall call such meetings upon the application of any three members of the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-43. - Order of business. 
No mayor and council business shall be transacted except in an official meeting of the mayor and council, and the presiding officer shall use reasonable diligence to notify all councilmembers of any special or called meeting. The chief of police or a police officer shall, when required, give notice to the members of the council of any such special or called meeting. The following order shall be observed in the transaction of business at regular meetings: 
(1)  Reading of minutes. 
(2)  Unfinished business. 
(3)  Reports of committees. 
(4)  Reports of officers. 
(5)  New business. 
(6)  Adjournment. 
(Prior Code, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-44. - Rules governing conduct of meetings. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to adopt such rules governing its meetings as it may deem expedient. Except as provided by rules adopted by the mayor and council, in all matters of parliamentary procedure, Roberts' Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern and apply. 
(1)  The rules and order of business shall be observed in all cases, unless suspended temporarily for a special purpose of an emergency nature by a vote of all members present. Any member may move at any time for the suspension of any rule, and such motion must be seconded to entitle it to consideration. 
(2)  If any member, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the rules of the mayor and council, the presiding officer shall, or any member can, call him to order; in which case the member so called to order shall immediately cease discussion unless permitted by the presiding officer to explain; and the mayor and council if appealed to, shall decide the question without debate. If the decision is in favor of the member so called to order, he shall be at liberty to proceed; if otherwise, he shall not proceed without leave of the mayor and council to proceed in order. 
(3)  Any member of the mayor and council may interrupt any other member who is speaking for the purpose of propounding a parliamentary inquiry or to make a point of order. 
(Prior Code, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-45. - Conduct of spectators at meetings restricted. 
(a)  Except during such periods of time at mayor and council meetings, as the mayor and council shall set aside for public discussion, it shall be unlawful for any person present as a spectator to interrupt or disturb the proceedings in any manner by voice, actions or otherwise. 
(b)  During periods set aside for public discussion of any nature, any person desiring to speak shall secure the permission of the presiding officer by first silently raising his hand and being recognized. The use of profanity, obscene language, threats or any violent or abusive conduct by any person shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon the order of the presiding officer at any such meeting, to forcibly if necessary, evict any person violating the provisions of this section from the mayor and council meeting hall. 
(Prior Code, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-46. - Questions of order. 
The mayor or presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any member dissatisfied with his ruling shall have a right to appeal to the mayor and council, which may decide the question of order by a majority vote, which said vote shall be final and conclusive. 
(Prior Code, § 2-8) 
Sec. 2-47. - Majority to govern; tie vote. 
In all matters pending before the mayor and council, a majority vote of those present shall govern, and in all cases of a tie, the mayor or the presiding officer shall give the deciding vote, but at no other time shall the mayor or presiding officer vote unless specially provided by ordinance or by the city Charter. 
(Prior Code, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-48. - Notice to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order. 
(Prior Code, § 2-11) 
Secs. 2-49—2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-70. - Election of city officers. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall, at their first regular scheduled meeting in January of each year, at which members-elect are installed, must soon thereafter elect, by majority vote, the following officers: 
(1)  Mayor pro tem. 
(2)  Municipal judge. 
(3)  Utility superintendent. 
(4)  Any other officer as they may deem necessary for the proper administration of the government of the city. 
(b)  The officers so elected, except as otherwise provided in this Code, shall hold their offices for and during the term of one year and until their successors are elected and qualified, or until they are suspended, discharged, removed or otherwise disqualified. 
(Prior Code, § 5-1) 
Sec. 2-71. - Qualification of age. 
Any citizen of this state otherwise qualified, who has attained the age of 18 years, shall be eligible to hold any municipal office, except those of a judicial nature. 
(Prior Code, § 5-2) 
Sec. 2-72. - Oath of city officers. 
All officers elected by the mayor and council shall, before entering upon the discharges of the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the following oath before some officer authorizes by law to administer the same: 
I, ________, do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself in, and faithfully discharge of the duties of, the office of ________, to which I have been elected, to the best of my ability, and that I will honestly account for and pay over all public moneys that may come into my hands during my term of office. So help me God. 
(Prior Code, § 5-4) 
Sec. 2-73. - Discharge of city employees—Grounds. 
All employees of the city shall serve during good behavior, and no such employee shall be discharged except for just cause, such as, for example: 
(1)  Termination of the need of the services an employee was hired to render. 
(2)  Lack of funds available for wages or salary. 
(3)  Failure or inability of the employee to perform his duties satisfactorily. 
(4)  Insurrection or insubordination. 
(5)  Conviction of crime under the laws of the United States or any state thereof. 
(6)  Membership of affiliation with any organization promoting or advocating the overthrow of our government. 
(7)  Discourtesy to the public in the discharge of his duties. 
(8)  Any conduct prejudicial to the best interests and welfare of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 5-5) 
Sec. 2-74. - Same—Hearings; suspension. 
No such employee shall be discharged for an alleged charge until a finding that just cause for dismissal exists shall be made by the mayor and council at a hearing on the matter before them. Such employee shall be given reasonable notice of the time and place of said hearing and of the alleged cause for dismissal, and at such hearing shall be given an opportunity to appear in his own behalf and to produce witnesses in his behalf. Provided, however, the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the members of the city council, may suspend an employee charged with alleged violations for dismissal pending the hearing thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 5-6) 
Sec. 2-75. - Fines; discharges; suspension; reprimand. 
Any officer elected or appointed by the mayor and council, shall be subject to fines, removal, suspension or reprimand by the mayor and council for malpractice, incompetency or inefficiency in his discharge of duties, or for any conduct unbecoming an officer. His pay shall cease from the date of such suspension, removal or discharge. 
(Prior Code, § 5-7) 
Sec. 2-76. - Removal of officers. 
Appointed officers provided for in the Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by the Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of the Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by the Charter or by state law; or 
(7)  Removal of an officer pursuant to this section shall be accomplished by the following method: by the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the mayor and council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the grounds for removal and to a public hearing that shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. 
(Prior Code, § 3-1) 
Sec. 2-77. - Records retention. 
(a)  Records committee. There is hereby created a records committee for the City of Milner, said committee to consist of the city administrator, city clerk, and one member of the city council. It shall be the duty of the records committee to coordinate the city's records management plan; review and recommend approval, disapproval, or modification of records retention schedules to the city council; and to establish procedures for the maintenance and security of records. Review of records retention schedules shall be based upon legal, fiscal, administrative and historical retention requirements. 
(b)  Meetings. The city council member who is appointed to the committee shall serve as the committee chairman and shall schedule meetings of the committee as necessary. 
(c)  Retention schedule. The most recent "Retention Schedules for Local Government Paper and Electronic Records" as compiled by the Georgia Secretary of State Division of Archives and History is hereby adopted and by reference incorporated herein and made a part of this Code as completely and to the same extent as if all provisions thereof were fully recited in this section. Provided, however, that the records committee herein established and created may make recommendations to revise, amend, delete, or add schedules not in conflict with state law and as deemed advisable and necessary, and to address the retention of any record not otherwise addressed therein. Final approval authority for all recommendations by the records committee shall be vested in the city council. 
(Ord. No. 0-13-01, § 1, 10-9-2013) 
Secs. 2-78—2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK AND TREASURER 

Sec. 2-96. - Offices combined. 
The offices of clerk and treasurer shall be, and the same are hereby, consolidated, to be known and designated as "clerk" or "clerk and treasurer." 
(Prior Code, § 7-1) 
Sec. 2-97. - Attendance at mayor and council meetings; records. 
The clerk and treasurer shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council and keep a correct record of the proceedings of the same. 
(Prior Code, § 7-2) 
Sec. 2-98. - Records of minutes, licenses, books of account; insurance, fi. fas., deeds, and obligations. 
The clerk and treasurer shall keep the following books and accounts: 
(1)  A book of minutes, in which shall be recorded a correct record of the proceedings of all meetings of the mayor and council. 
(2)  A correct record of all licenses issued. 
(3)  A cash book, and such other books of accounts as the mayor and council may from time to time direct, showing of all cash items paid to the clerk for the city, and from what source the same came; and all cash paid out, and to whom and for what purpose paid. 
(4)  A record of insurance carried by the city, showing amount of each policy, time taken out, date of expiration, and what property is covered by said insurance. 
(5)  A fi. fa. docket each for business license fi. fas., delinquent tax fi. fas., and for each other separate and distinct kind of fi. fa. that the city may issue. 
(6)  A deed record, in which shall be recorded all deeds made to the city, before the same are deposited for safekeeping. 
(7)  A bills payable book (or account) showing all bonds and notes given by the city with their date, their maturity, amount of the same and rate of interest. The clerk shall enter opposite each such obligation the date when paid, the amount paid, to whom paid and how. 
(Prior Code, § 7-3) 
Sec. 2-99. - Issuance of licenses, notices processes, and orders. 
The clerk and treasurer shall issue all licenses, summons, subpoenas, processes, orders and notices provided for by law or that may be required of him by the mayor or council. 
(Prior Code, § 7-4) 
Sec. 2-100. - Maintenance of all city records; public inspection. 
All the records of the city of every nature and description shall be kept in the clerk and treasurer's office. No records shall be removed from this office without an order from the mayor and council, except by an officer of the city when it shall be necessary in the discharge of his duty. 
(Prior Code, § 7-5) 
Sec. 2-101. - Collection and payment of monies. 
The clerk and treasurer shall collect all monies due the city from any source whatever, and shall pay out any sums demanded of upon proper authority. He shall be authorized to pay any accounts or other evidences of indebtedness against the city when the same shall have been ordered paid by a majority vote of the mayor and council; he shall likewise be authorized to pay out any monies due by the city, when presented with any voucher bearing the approval of the mayor and council and the signature of the mayor. 
(Prior Code, § 7-6) 
Secs. 2-102—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-131. - Election; report. 
The city attorney shall be elected by the mayor and council, at the same time as the election of the city clerk and treasurer. The city attorney shall hold office for one year and until his successor is elected and qualified, unless removed by the mayor and council for failure to perform his duties. 
(Prior Code, § 6-1) 
Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CODE OF ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1. 

Sec. 2-161. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office is not used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics is adopted. 
(b)  This code has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by members of the governing authority; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such members of the governing authority by setting forth those acts and actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such members of the governing authority of private financial or other interests in manners that affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-1)) 
Sec. 2-162. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this division that members of the governing authority avoid any action, whether or not specifically prohibited herein, which might result in, or create the appearance of, the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of the city. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-2) 
Sec. 2-163. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this division shall be applicable to the governing authority which, for purposes of this division, means the mayor, any and all members of the city council, and any and all members appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-3)) 
Sec. 2-164. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Benefit means: 
(1)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, perceived or intended by either the one who offers it or the one to whom it is offered to be sufficient in value to influence a member of the governing authority in the performance or nonperformance of an official action; or 
(2)  Anything, regardless of its monetary value, which, under the circumstances, a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a member of the governing authority in the performance or nonperformance of an official action. 
Censure means a public expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the ethics committee containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member of the governing authority; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months after the complaining party knew or should have reasonably known of the alleged misconduct. 
Formal reprimand means an action taken by the mayor and city council against a member of the governing authority found to be in violation of this chapter, issued in writing to the member, chastising the member for the violation. The record of the formal reprimand shall be inserted into the minutes of the city council. 
Governing authority means the mayor, the city council, or any appointed board or commission of the city. 
Government or city means the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Immediate family means: 
(1)  A member of the governing authority's spouse; and 
(2)  A member of the governing authority's parents, parents-in-law, sisters, sisters-in-law, brothers, brothers-in-law, stepparents, stepbrothers or stepsisters. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a matter which is or which is expected to become the subject of an official action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in a matter involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; or 
(2)  Any business in which the member or a member of his immediate family is a director, officer, employee or shareholder. 
Member means a member of the governing authority. 
Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of the governing authority. 
Reprimand means an expression of disapproval, either public or private. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-4)) 
Sec. 2-165. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Use of public property. A member of the governing authority shall not use city property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall a member direct city employees to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(b)  Use of confidential information. A member of the governing authority shall not make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, city information not available to the general public. 
(c)  Acceptance of gifts. A member of the governing authority shall not solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  Seeks to have the member of the governing authority exercise a matter of discretion in his favor; 
(3)  Has the appearance to influence the member of the governing authority in the performance of an official act or action. 
(d)  Unauthorized use of city employees. A member of the governing authority shall not use his position to request or require a city employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church, or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for the member's personal, business, or political purposes; or 
(3)  Work for the member personally without offering just compensation. 
(e)  Coercion by members of the governing authority. A member of the governing authority shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to him or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom the member has business or financial ties. 
(f)  Prohibited contracts. The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with any member of the governing authority or with a business in which any member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply to the following contracts: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. 
(3)  A contract entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation; provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(5)  Contracts entered into with the mayor or a member of the city council, or with a business in which the mayor or any member of the city council has an interest; provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, and disclosure of the nature of such person's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted. 
(g)  Conflicts of interest. A member of the governing authority shall not knowingly have an interest in any official action. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-5)) 
Sec. 2-166. - Disclosure and actions following disclosure. 
(a)  A member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any conflict of interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this division, the member of the governing authority shall not participate in ex parte communications with other members regarding the matter. 
(b)  To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after the member of the governing authority has disclosed that he has a conflict of interest or a potential conflict of interest in any matter, the member shall leave his regular seat as a member of the governing authority and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. 
(c)  A member of the governing authority who has a conflict of interest involving a matter shall not participate in the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-6)) 
Sec. 2-167. - Ethics committee. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall appoint an ethics committee consisting of three persons. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a three-year term. Members of the ethics committee shall be nominated by the mayor and approved by an affirmative vote of the city council. The members of the ethics committee shall serve without compensation. The ethics committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To review a complaint to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the ethics committee, or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the ethics committee; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent member of the governing authority. 
(3)  To investigate the complaint and to hold a hearing within 30 days after the receipt of any complaint requiring further investigation and to receive and collect evidence and information concerning the complaint. At any hearing, the respondent member of the governing authority shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before the hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses, to cross examine such witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(4)  The decision of the ethics committee shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest. The ethics committee shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council whether to invoke the disciplinary actions described in section 2-169. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall take action upon the recommendation of the ethics committee at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council following receipt of the recommendation. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-7)) 
Sec. 2-168. - Receipt of complaints. 
All complaints for a violation of this division shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter forward the complaint to the ethics committee. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-8)) 
Sec. 2-169. - Penalties. 
Any member of the governing authority found to have knowingly violated any provision of this division shall be subject to reprimand, formal reprimand, or censure by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-9)) 
Sec. 2-170. - Right to appeal. 
Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by a decision of the mayor and city council may appeal to the county superior court within 30 days after the decision of the mayor and city council becomes final. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the mayor and city council which supported the decision of the mayor and city council; provided, however, no action of the mayor and city council refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this division may be reviewed by the superior court. 
(Ord. of ?, § 2(8-10)) 
DIVISION 5. - PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-171. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "Prosecuting Attorney of the Milner Municipal Court." 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-172. - Findings and intent. 
This division is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. § 15.18.5 and to create this division. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-173. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Milner in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-174. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court of the City of Milner shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this division shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-175. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Milner shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Milner." 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-176. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Milner, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one year. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-177. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Milner shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15.18.96. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-178. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. The assistant prosecuting attorney(s) shall meet the same qualifications as the prosecuting attorney. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Sec. 2-179. - Ratification. 
This division shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 10-13-2014) 
Secs. 2-180—2-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq. 

Secs. 2-194—2-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-225. - City purchasing agent. 
(a)  Designated. The city administrator shall serve as city purchasing agent and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this article. 
(b)  Scope of purchasing authority. The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city, in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this article and such rules and regulations as the agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the department of purchasing and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the chief administrator and the mayor and council. 
(1)  Exceptions prohibited. The authority of the agent to negotiate all purchases for all using agencies shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using agency. 
(2)  Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or officers to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this article other than through the purchasing agent, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(c)  Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in subsection (b) of this section, and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this article, the agent shall: 
(1)  Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at least expense to the city. 
(2)  Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(3)  Rules and regulations. Establish, and amend when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this article and any others necessary to its operation. 
(4)  Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by private businesses and organizations. 
(5)  Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this article. 
(6)  Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers. 
(7)  Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt, and maintain a vendors' catalog file. Said catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices, and discounts. 
(8)  Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(9)  Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(10)  Cooperation with department of finance. Cooperate with the department of finance so as to secure for the city the maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting. 
(11)  Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of time. 
(Prior Code, § 12-4) 
Sec. 2-226. - Requisition and estimates. 
All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the agent shall prescribe. 
(1)  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner, with the agent at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(2)  Revisory power in agent. The agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost; but revision as to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications established pursuant to this article. 
(Prior Code, § 12-6) 
Sec. 2-227. - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the city treasurer or other designated official shall have certified, after pre-audit, that there is, to the credit of the using agencies concerned, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(Prior Code, § 12-7) 
Sec. 2-228. - Prohibition of interest. 
(a)  Void orders or purchases; variance. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which the agent, or any officer or employee of the city, is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the mayor and council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this subsection when it finds such action to be in the best interests of the city. 
(b)  Gifts and rebates. The agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 12-8) 
Sec. 2-229. - Competitive bidding required. 
All purchases of, and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property that has become obsolete and unusable shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based on competitive bids. 
(Prior Code, § 12-9) 
Sec. 2-230. - Formal contract procedure. 
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. 
a.  Newspaper. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one official newspaper in the city and at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. 
b.  Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required in subsection (1)a of this section shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
c.  Bidders list. The agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list, which the agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
d.  Bulletin board. The agent shall also advertise all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on the public bulletin board in the city hall. 
(2)  Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. 
a.  Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
b.  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
c.  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. The agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(5)  Bidders in default to city. The agent shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other monies due the city. 
(6)  Award of contract. 
a.  Authority in agent. The agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article. 
b.  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
c.  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
d.  Tie bids. 
1.  Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total amount of unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. 
2.  Outside vendors. Where subsection (6)d.1 of this section is not in effect, the agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
e.  Performance bonds. The agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(7)  Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 12-10) 
Sec. 2-231. - Small purchases. 
(a)  Any contract or purchase order for supplies, services and construction not exceeding $5,000.00 may be made in accordance with small purchase procedures adopted by the purchasing agent; provided that contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. Insofar as it is practicable, no less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations. The award shall be made to the business offering the lowest responsive quotation. The name of the business submitting a quotation and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the purchasing agent may make purchases of goods, supplies and services that cost less than $250.00 without obtaining quotes. Purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this subsection. 
Sec. 2-232. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  By agent; recorded explanation. In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the chief administrator shall be empowered to authorize the agent to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the agent with the mayor and council and shall be entered in the minutes of the mayor and council and shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  By head of departments. In case of actual emergency, and with the consent of the agent, and the approval of the chief administrator, the head of any using agency may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency that may vitally affect the life, health, or convenience of citizens. 
(1)  Recorded explanation. The head of such using agency shall send to the agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record together with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed with the mayor and council as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Emergency procedure. The agent shall prescribe, by rules and regulations, the procedure under which emergency purchases by heads of using agencies may be made. 
(Prior Code, § 12-15) 
Sec. 2-233. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(Prior Code, § 12-18) 
Sec. 2-234. - Basis of purchases. 
All purchases within the county and city shall be made strictly on the basis of value received, based on the quality of the thing purchased and the lowest price to be paid therefore, which is acceptable to the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 3-3) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Injury or destroying; use of poisons. 
Whoever willfully and maliciously kills, wounds, maims, disfigures or poisons any domestic animal or exposes any poisonous substances with the intent that the life of any animal should be destroyed thereby, such animal being the property of another, shall upon conviction be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 13-1) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 6-2. - Hogs prohibited in the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep enclosed in any pen, or otherwise, any swine of any description within the city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 13-3) 
Sec. 6-3. - Running at large—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any horse, mule, jack, cow, bull, goat, sheep, hog, cattle, or any kind of livestock, to allow the same to run at large in and upon the streets, alleys, or commons of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 13-4) 
State Law reference— Livestock at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Domestic fowl; trespassing prohibited. 
All chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys and other domestic fowl shall be kept by the owners thereof on their own premises, and it shall be unlawful for the owners of such fowl to allow them to run or be at large in the streets, or to allow or permit them to run or be at large in the streets, or to allow them to go upon and trespass on the yards, lawns or premises of other people. 
(Prior Code, § 13-5) 
Sec. 6-5. - Impounding animals. 
It shall be the duty of the police of the city, and of such other persons designated by the mayor and council, to take up and confine any animals or fowl mentioned in this chapter as shall be found at large within the city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 13-7) 
Sec. 6-6. - Animal restraint. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, or acts as custodian of a dog for a period of 72 hours or more. 
Restraint means securing of a dog by a leash or lead with a collar, or enclosure by way of a fence, electronic fence, or other enclosure such that it may not run at large beyond the limits of the property of its owner or custodian. A dog shall also be considered under restraint if, although not secured or enclosed, it is within the limits of the property of its owner or custodian and is supervised to the extent that someone responsible is present on the property of the dog's owner and the dog is not running at large. A dog shall also be considered under restraint if, while off the property of its owner or custodian, it is restrained on a leash, within a motor vehicle, crate or dog box, or obedient to voice or electronic commands, and is accompanied by the owner, custodian, or other person of responsible age. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to dogs while training or participating in lawful activities, such as hunting, obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking or law enforcement work. 
(b)  Failure to restrain dog. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to restrain a dog which is owned by or in the custody or control of such person. 
(c)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police department and the city's code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this section. The police department, code enforcement officer, and other city designated employees shall have the right to go on any private property as is reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. Violations of this section may be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Milner Municipal Court. Violators of this section shall be punished as follows: 
First offense in any six-month period warning. 
Second offense in any six-month period a fine not exceed $100.00. 
Third and subsequent offense in any six-month period: a fine not to exceed $250.00 per offense. 
(Ord. No. 11-3, § 1, 2-9-2011) 
Chapter 10 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Conformity to regulations; authority. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Ord. of 5-17-1994, §§ 1—3) 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic CATV service means the distribution of radio, video, or stereo signals via cable. 
Cable TV system means a system comprised of antenna, cables, towers, wires, microwave, converters, designed for the purpose of distributing radio, stereo, or video signals to or from subscribers within the permit area. 
CATV means cable TV system or satellite master antenna system (SMATV). 
City means the City of Milner, Georgia, the mayor and council, or any other officer, employee, agent or body thereof authorized to act on behalf of the city for purposes of the administration, enforcement or implementation of this article. 
Company means any person or legal entity granted a Cable Television System Permit pursuant to this article. 
Premium or tier CATV service means radio, stereo or video signals distributed in addition to the basic CATV service, at an additional charge. 
Street means the surface and/or space above or below any street, place, right-of-way, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, or utility easement now or hereafter existing within the permit area. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 1) 
Sec. 10-22. - Permit required; grant of authority. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any city-owned street, alley, right-of-way, easement, or other property owned by the city for purposes of the operation of a cable television (CATV) system or the installation or location of CATV lines, poles, cables or other facilities without a CATV system permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any CATV system permit issued hereunder shall be nonexclusive. However, once a new CATV system permit is issued by the city for initial construction of a CATV system, no additional permits shall be issued until either: 
(1)  The system for which the permit was issued is completed and activated; 
(2)  The existing permit is revoked or abandoned; or 
(3)  Three years has passed; 
whichever comes first. 
(c)  No CATV system permit shall be granted until the mayor and council determines that: 
(1)  The applicant, its proposed system and operation are financially viable. 
(2)  The applicant has the technical ability and necessary experience to successfully operate a CATV system. 
(3)  The applicant and its principals are of good moral character. 
(4)  The applicant is proposing adequate service to promote the public convenience and necessity. 
(5)  All requirements of this article and other applicable requirements of law have been and will be complied with. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, the mayor and council may conduct such investigations and hold such hearings as it deems necessary and proper to determine if the criteria of this section have been met. Reasonable notice of any hearings scheduled shall be given to the applicant. 
(e)  CATV system permit may be transferred or assigned only on approval by mayor and council. If the permit or the CATV system is transferred by bankruptcy/receivership, assignment for the benefit of creditors or by operation of law, this permit shall terminate 120 days thereafter, unless an extension is granted by the mayor and council to allow time for application for a new permit to be filed. Transfer to an assignee will not be unreasonably denied. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 2) 
Sec. 10-23. - Term of permit. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for a term of 15 years, unless terminated prior to 15 years in accordance with other provisions of this article. The 15-year term shall commence upon approval of the permit by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 3) 
Sec. 10-24. - Application for new CATV system permit. 
(a)  Applications for a new permit shall be made on forms provided by the city. The burden shall be on the applicant to prove that it meets the criteria for issuance of the permit as specified in section 10-22(c). The applicant may submit such information as it desires to meet its burden, but, as a minimum, the application form shall be fully completed and accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An application fee as necessary to cover actual costs incurred by the city in investigating and approving the permit, including publication costs and attorney's fees, not to exceed the amount as provided by section 18-10(a). The city shall give the applicant an initial estimate of such costs subject to adjustment for actual costs. 
(2)  The general description of all aspects of the proposed operation, including services to be provided, programming, office hours and location, etc. 
(3)  The complete plans for the construction of the proposed system and proposed system map unless the application is for a change of ownership of an existing system, in which event the existing system maps should be submitted. 
(4)  A list of other cable television franchises or permits held by the applicant, its parent, subsidiaries, or interlocking companies. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to require any additional information necessary for its determination of whether or not the applicable criteria for granting the permit are met. 
(c)  Accompanying the application shall be a notarized certificate of the applicant stating that it accepts the authority of the city to grant the permit, acknowledges the validity of all requirements of this article, and certifies that the applicant will comply with all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 4) 
Sec. 10-25. - Required construction schedule. 
Within three months after approval of a permit for a system which is not installed, the company shall commence significant construction of the system and shall complete system construction with due diligence. Thereafter construction shall be completed within one year of the issuance of the permit, unless a reasonable cause for delay is shown. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 5) 
Sec. 10-26. - Renewal of existing permit. 
(a)  Applications for renewal of an existing CATV system permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the city and at a minimum accompanied by the following: 
(1)  An application fee as necessary to cover actual costs incurred by the city in investigating and approving the permit, including publication costs and attorney's fees, not to exceed the amount as provided by section 18-10(b). The city shall give the applicant an initial estimate of such costs subject to adjustment for actual costs. 
(2)  The company's existing rate schedule if not previously filed with the city. 
(3)  Accompanying the application shall be a notarized certificate of the applicant stating that it accepts the authority of the city to grant the permit, acknowledges the validity of all requirements of this article, and certifies that the applicant will comply with all provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city may require any other additional information it deems necessary to determine whether or not the applicant for renewal meets the criteria set out in section 10-22(c). 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 6) 
Sec. 10-27. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the mayor and council if it determines that the company has failed to comply with any provision of this article or the permit, or is in violation of any applicable provision of any federal, state or local law, and the company fails to remedy the situation as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city shall provide the company with at least ten days notice of the hearing on the alleged failure or violation during which time the company may remedy the situation. If the mayor and council determines following the hearing that the grounds specified in subsection (a) of this section exist, it shall set a reasonable time period in which the company may remedy the situation. If the company fails to remedy the situation in such period, the mayor and council may revoke the permit or take such other action as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 7) 
Sec. 10-28. - Acquisition of the system by the city or removal. 
(a)  Procedures for acquisition. 
(1)  If the company shall cease operations or abandon its system during the term of the permit, the city may acquire the system for the net book value thereof. If the permit is revoked by the mayor and council, the city may acquire the system for its fair market value as a going concern. 
(2)  The city shall deliver written notice to the company at its office of its intent to purchase the system. Within ten days after delivery of the notice, the company and the city shall each appoint an arbitrator. These arbitrators shall within 15 days thereafter appoint a third arbitrator. The arbitrators shall then determine fair market value or the net book value, as the case may be, of the property to be acquired and make a report to the city and the company of their determination within 60 days of the date of the notice of intent to purchase. 
(3)  The city shall have 30 days after receiving the report on the value to make a final determination whether or not to purchase the system. If the city elects to purchase the system, it shall specify the closing date, which shall be within one year thereafter, at which time the payment determined in accordance with this section shall be made to the company and the system transferred to the city. In the time prior to closing, the company shall continue to operate the system and maintain it in good working order. 
(4)  If the city elects not to purchase the system, any permit in effect shall remain in effect. 
(5)  The expenses of the third arbitrator and common expenses of the three arbitrators shall be shared equally by the city and the company. The expenses of the arbitrator appointed by each shall be paid by the both the city and the company. 
(6)  If the company fails or refuses to appoint an arbitrator or otherwise comply with this section, the city shall unilaterally determine the purchase price to be paid within the time limits provided in this section or it may seek a court order enforcing compliance with this section. 
(b)  The city shall not be liable for severance damages on account of portions of the company's system located outside of the city limits which will be severed because of the purchase by the city; however, the city will, upon request of the company, purchase such severed portions of the system located outside the city on the same terms as it may purchase the system within the city. 
(c)  In the event of termination of a permit without renewal, or revocation of the permit, if the city does not elect to acquire the system in accordance with the procedures outlined in subsection (a) of this section, the city may require the company to remove all of its cables, lines and facilities from city streets, alleys and easements within a period of six months, repairing and restoring any damage caused thereby. If the company fails to remove such components within that period, they shall become the property of the city. 
(d)  The provisions of this section are alternatives to the city's power of eminent domain which power is expressly reserved. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 8) 
Sec. 10-29. - Use of streets, alleys and easements. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this article gives the company the right to use city-owned streets and alleys, and those easements owned by the city which, by their terms, may be used for cable television facilities. Such use shall allow the installation and maintenance of wires, conduits, cables, poles and other appurtenant facilities used in the distribution and transmission of cable television. Such use shall be subject to the conditions of this section. Nothing herein shall limit the city's rights to vacate, sell or encumber any city-owned property if easements are reserved for any existing CATV lines or facilities. 
(b)  The company shall have the right to trim trees so as to prevent contact with its cables. 
(c)  The location of the lines and other facilities shall be designed to minimize interference with other uses of the city streets, alleys and easements. The company shall use the poles of the telephone company or power company whenever possible for its lines subject to the requirements of this section for undergrounding, unless such poles are unfit or unfeasible for use, in which event the lines shall be underground. The company shall not erect poles of its own unless power or telephone poles are unavailable and the city determines that undergrounding is technically infeasible or economically too costly. 
(d)  The company shall submit to the city, prior to construction, plans showing the location of all proposed lines and facilities to be installed in city streets, alleys or easements. No such facilities or lines may be installed therein until the location has been approved by the city. Within 24 hours of request by the city, the company shall advise the city of the location of any underground lines. 
(e)  The city may require that any lines or other facilities be relocated or removed whenever necessary for the use, operation, maintenance, or construction of city streets, alleys and easements or other city facilities. The cost of removal or relocation shall be borne by the company. 
(f)  No excavation may be made in any city street, alley or easement without obtaining a permit from the city in compliance with the provisions of the city's excavation permit ordinance, if any. The company, at its expense, shall repair any damage or disturbance to the public streets, alleys or easements or pavement, sidewalk or improvement thereon caused by the company's operations. 
(g)  The company shall furnish copies of its as-built system map and keep an updated copy on file with the city. 
(h)  All cables and lines shall be constructed underground when required by city subdivision regulations or when located in areas where the power or telephone lines are underground. 
(i)  The company shall convert any of its overhead lines to underground lines upon the request of any person willing to pay for the cost of such conversion. 
(j)  In the event that an overhead cable route is eliminated because of inability to continue the use of the poles of the telephone or power company, the company shall underground its lines and facilities if the other utility is undergrounding its lines and facilities. If such is not the case, then the company may install its own overhead pole lines if the city determines that undergrounding is technically infeasible or too expensive. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 9) 
Sec. 10-30. - Safety requirements. 
The company shall exercise due care in the installation and maintenance of equipment so as to avoid damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 10) 
Sec. 10-31. - Permit or franchise fee. 
(a)  In consideration of the rights and privileges granted under a permit, the company shall pay to the city a permit fee as specified in this subsection. The fee shall not be surcharged or listed separately on any consumers bill. The amount of the fee shall be as provided by section 18-10(c). 
(b)  Payments shall be made quarterly to the city and be accompanied by penetration figures for the last day of the quarter. Payments are due within 30 days after each three months' quarter of the calendar year, with the first payment for each year due April 30. This permit fee is in addition to any and all taxes, fees or charges imposed by the city or other governmental entity. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 12) 
Sec. 10-32. - Insurance and liability. 
(a)  The company shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liabilities, and judgment for damages, including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees and disbursements and liabilities assumed by the city in connection therewith, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the company, its agents or employees, or the company's cable television operations under the CATV system permit. This shall include any liability with regard to a claim for a violation of any law, including civil rights or anti-trust claims, and any litigation contesting the validity of this article or the permit granted hereunder. 
(b)  The company shall maintain, through the terms of the permit, liability insurance insuring the city and the company in amounts equal to or exceeding the current limits of the liability of the city under O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 33 (O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.). Certificates of insurance shall be filed with the city for each policy. Each policy shall contain an endorsement that it cannot be cancelled unless 30 days written notice of cancellation is provided to the city. The company shall also maintain adequate fire and casualty insurance. 
(c)  By acceptance of the grant of any permit pursuant to this article, the company covenants and agrees that it will not at anytime or in any manner or proceeding set up against the city any claim or proceeding challenging this article or the grant of the permit pursuant to this article as being invalid for any reason. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 13) 
Sec. 10-33. - Service area and line extensions. 
The company shall be required to provide and extend service to all persons within the city limits desiring service, who pay the company's standard connection charge, monthly fee, and who are within 150 feet of the company's trunk lines. Whenever the company has received service requests from a minimum of 15 subscribers within 1,200 feet from the company's trunk cable, service will be provided at the standard connection and monthly charge. In cases where distance from trunk cable to subscriber is more than 150 feet and density is less than specified above, service will be made available on a basis of material cost, labor, and easements, in order to prevent inequitable burden on other cable subscribers. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 14) 
Sec. 10-34. - Minimum service and operation requirements. 
(a)  The company shall maintain a local telephone number in the city. Complaints from consumers shall be responded to promptly and courteously by the company and a log listing all complaints, service requests and their dispositions shall be kept by the company available for inspection by the city. 
(b)  The company shall at all times comply with the regulations and laws of the state and the United States and any of its agencies. 
(c)  Construction and the operation of the system shall comply with the city's applicable regulations and ordinances. 
(d)  The system shall be designed to provide subscribers with a uniform high quality of reception throughout the city and shall be operated continuously. The system shall have a minimum capability of not fewer than 12 video channels. 
(e)  The company shall provide continuous service to all subscribers in return for the payment of their fee. In the event the company fails to operate the system for five days, the city shall have the right to operate the system until such time as a new operator is approved and shall be reimbursed for any costs or expenses incurred as a result of the company's failure to operate the system, unless such failure is on account of technical impossibility, acts of God, disaster, war, or other such reasons beyond the company's control. Financial problems, misfeasance or malfeasance of the company or its employees shall be no excuse for failure to operate. 
(f)  The company shall, to the extent economically feasible, take advantage of new technical developments in the field of transmission of television or radio signals which would afford the company the opportunity to be more efficient and to provide better service, and shall as far as reasonably practical, maintain the current state of the art with regard to cable television systems. 
(g)  The company shall temporarily move or relocate any of its lines, cables or other facilities when necessary for construction, moving a building or otherwise, if the expense of such operation will be paid by the person requesting it. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 15) 
Sec. 10-35. - Local access. 
(a)  The city or other governmental entity shall be authorized to make emergency use of the company's system. 
(b)  The company shall provide at least one channel which can be used nonexclusively as a public access channel. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 16) 
Sec. 10-36. - Financial reports and access to records. 
The city shall have access to all business records and financial records of the company upon request as necessary to audit payment of permit fees. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 17) 
Sec. 10-37. - Reservation of rights. 
The city reserves the right to adopt additional regulations and ordinances governing the operation of CATV systems in accordance with the lawful exercise of its police power. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 18) 
Sec. 10-38. - Notices. 
Any notices required to be given to the city shall be delivered to the mayor at city hall. Notices to the company may be delivered to the business office of the company. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 19) 
Sec. 10-39. - Free connections. 
The company shall provide, free of charge, one cable television connection outlet to each building owned by the city, each public school located within the city, each public library with the city, any church, youth center or school for the handicapped, upon request. This shall not require the company to provide channels which are premium pay channels. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 20) 
Sec. 10-40. - Approval of transfer. 
CATV system permit may be transferred or assigned, only after approval by the mayor and council. No sale or transfer of the company's assets pertaining to this permit shall be effective until the prospective assignee or lessee has filed with the city a document describing such sale or lease, and accepting the terms of the company's permit. The mayor and council approval of such sale or lease shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section or other sections of this article shall not preclude the mortgaging or assigning of rights, or the pledge of stock by the company, for financing purposes. The city retains the right and option to purchase the company's assets by meeting and equaling the offered price in any such sale. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 23) 
Sec. 10-41. - Line severing, equipment damages. 
At such time the company's cable or equipment is damaged, the cost of repair or replacement shall be paid by the responsible party. The company may charge for time and materials used for said repair. The city will cooperate with the company in enforcing the payment of charges arising from above conditions. 
(Ord. of 12-10-1982, § 24) 
Secs. 10-42—10-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE-ISSUED CABLE OR VIDEO FRANCHISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-1, § 1—3, adopted February 20, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as a new Chapter 11. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 10, Art. III, §§ 10-46, 10-47. 

Sec. 10-46. - Franchise fee. 
The city imposes a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the City of Milner for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 2, 2-20-08) 
Sec. 10-47. - Authorized designee. 
The mayor is authorized upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the City of Milner of the five percent fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-1, § 3, 2-20-08) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Obstructing enforcement. 
Any person who shall in any way, by words or acts, obstruct, hinder or annoy the officers of the city in the enforcement of this chapter or any other sanitary regulations of the city or in carrying out any lawful order or direction with respect to the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 16-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - Duty to keep premises clean. 
Every occupant or tenant of any property in the city shall keep all houses, stores, yards, stables, lots, privies, water closets, cellars, wells, sinks, fowl houses, chicken coops, wash places or weeds or undergrowth thereon, and every other place about said premises at all times in a clean condition, disinfected and free from any inoperable or junk vehicle, filth, foul water, or anything offensive and injurious to health. In this section, the term "junk vehicle" means any motor vehicle that is required to be licensed under state law on which no license plate is displayed. 
(Prior Code, § 16-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Unsanitary deposits of excrement, garbage, other objectionable waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Prior Code, § 16-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Obstructing drainage prohibited. 
Any person who shall obstruct any ditch, sewer, drain, course of a stream, or course of surface water, where it has a natural and defined accustomed channel, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 16-4) 
Secs. 14-5—14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything that worketh inconvenience or injury to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be unlawful does not keep it from being a nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 20-1) 
Sec. 14-28. - Causing, maintaining unsanitary conditions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, or after notice from the chief of police or other officer of the city, to erect, cause, keep, maintain or allow to exist on property occupied by him or to be otherwise responsible for any uncleanliness in any building, store, house or lot, yard, sidewalk, or alley, or any foul cellar, well or sink, stagnant or foul water, stable, horse or cow lot, or pig pen or poultry house, chicken coop, wash place, or other nuisance or thing forbidden by the sanitary laws of this city, of which is attended by danger to the health of the citizens. 
(Prior Code, § 20-2) 
Sec. 14-29. - Offensive odors near residences or businesses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, store or keep any fish, hides, bones, guano, rags or other like items of an offensive odor, sufficiently near any business or residence in the city to be offensive or a nuisance to any of the occupants thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 20-3) 
Sec. 14-30. - Burning of trash and household garbage. 
No person shall burn trash without proper notification and consent from the city's fire chief or his assistant. However, household garbage shall not be burned at any time. Such consent shall be given upon a showing that public health and public safety will not be endangered. 
(Prior Code, § 20-5) 
Secs. 14-31—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 14-51. - Authorization. 
The Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article IX, Section II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) delegate the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 1, A.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-52. - Finding of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Milner, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 1, B.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-53. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 1, C.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-54. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 1, D.), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 14-55—14-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-61. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article applies to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Milner, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, A.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-62. - Basis for designation of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Lamar County are hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at City Hall, 100 Greenwood Street, Milner, Georgia 30257. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, B.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-63. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, C.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-64. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, D.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-65. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, D.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-66. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, F.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-67. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Milner, Georgia, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, G.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-68. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Milner, Georgia, from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 2, H.), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 14-69—14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14-81. - Designation of article administrator. 
The administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. The administrator duties will be assigned to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 3, A.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-82. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the mayor and council of the City of Milner, Georgia, on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 14-92(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest-floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The administrator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No 09-02, § 1(Art. 3, B.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-83. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
The city manager shall be the administrator of this article. Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-62, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 14-82(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 14-82(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 14-82(1)c. and 14-92(2) or 14-94(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No 09-02, § 1(Art. 3, C.), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 14-84—14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-91. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully-enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
i.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
ii.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame-ties-to-ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, A.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-92. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 14-91(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 14-83(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 14-91(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 14-92(3)a.—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-62 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 14-92(4)a., above, is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, B.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-93. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-62 where streams exist, but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data has been provided, but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 14-62, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions, [subsections] (2) and (3), shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 14-91(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air-conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, C.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-94. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-62 where streams with base flood elevations are provided, but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 14-92. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, D.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-95. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-62 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 14-91(4), "elevated buildings". 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 14-82(1)c. and 14-82(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, E.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-96. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, F.), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-97. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 4, G.), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 14-98—14-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-111. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Lamar County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this division are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia, may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 5, A—I.), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 14-112—14-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 14-121. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the Mayor and Council of the City of Milner, Georgia's, interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly-defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 14-62. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 1, 2009. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 1, 2009. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 1, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 1, 2009, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after April 1, 2009. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure.) (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 6), 3-18-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-02, § 1(Art. 6), adopted Mar. 18, 2009, states that the definitions set out above are as of February 25, 2009. 
Chapter 18 - FEES 

Secs. 18-1—18-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-10. - Cable communications. 
(a)  Application for new CATV system permit. The fee required by section 10-24(a)(1) shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  Renewal of CATV system permit. The fee required by section 10-26(a)(1) shall not exceed $100.00. 
(c)  CATV system permit or franchise fee. The fee required by section 10-31(a) shall be two percent of gross revenues realized from operations from within the city if system penetration is over 50 percent but less than 65 percent; three percent if system penetration is 65 percent or over but less than 75 percent; and four percent if system penetration is 75 percent or over, as determined on the last day of the quarter. No fee shall be charged if penetration is less than 50 percent. Such gross revenue shall not include sales taxes collected on behalf of the city or state, but shall include all service revenue and standard connection charges from operations within the city. 
Secs. 18-11—18-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-42. - Utilities. 
(a)  Water meter and line cut-on. The fee required by section 42-26 shall be $50.00 per facility. 
(b)  Connection to public water system. The fee required by section 42-27(a) shall be $1,800.00. 
(c)  Connection to public sewer. The fee required by section 42-85(a) shall be $1,800.00. 
(d)  Capacity recovery fee. City of Barnesville Capacity Recovery Fee shall be $1,400.00. 
(e)  Public sewer service. 
(1)  The monthly rates required by section 42-88(a) shall be as follows: 
• First 1,999 gallons (minimum charge) ..... $22.25 
• 2,000—5,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons) ..... $6.35 
• 5,001—10,000 gallons ..... $6.60 
• Over 10,000 gallons ..... $6.90 
(2)  In addition to the above fees, customers shall tender to the city a refundable deposit in the amount of $100.00. 
(f)  Public water service. 
(1)  The following monthly rates shall apply to water delivered to all customers located inside the corporate limits of the City of Milner and to all industrial customers whether located within or outside of the corporate limits of the City of Milner: 
• First 1,999 gallons (minimum charge) ..... $17.00 
• 2,000—5,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons) ..... $6.35 
• 5,001—10,000 gallons ..... $6.60 
• Over 10,000 gallons ..... $6.90 
(2)  The following monthly rates shall apply to water delivered to all non-industrial customers located outside of the corporate limits of the City of Milner: 
• First 1,999 gallons (minimum charge) ..... $23.30 
• 2,000—5,000 gallons (per 1,000 gallons) ..... $6.90 
• 5,001—10,000 gallons ..... $7.15 
• Over 10,000 gallons ..... $7.40 
(3)  In addition to the above fees, customers shall tender to the city a refundable deposit in the amount of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 2007-13, § 1, 11-21-07; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 12-17-2008; Ord. No. 10-3, § 1, 9-8-2010; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 4-16-2018; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 11-5-2018) 
Chapter 22 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Health permit required for business licenses. 
A valid health permit must be shown to the city clerk before a business license is given to the establishment. 
(Prior Code, § 14-1) 
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL AND PROFESSIONS TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Occupational licenses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Location and office mean and include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location that is the site of personal property that is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(c)(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the local government. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 22-22. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  Except as to those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations excluded by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16(a) and except as to those persons excluded by O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, an occupation tax of $50.00 for each location is hereby levied upon all businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations that have one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an occupation tax of $50.00 on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state, if the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property that generates income and that is located in the corporate limits. 
(c)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(d)  A business or practitioner, which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article, shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(f)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees that are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees that are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the clerk of the city. 
(g)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to an occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-4)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupational license authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7, 48-13-10. 
Sec. 22-23. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-5)) 
Sec. 22-24. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356, for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States; or 
(11)  Any charitable, nonprofit organization, as such as defined under section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code (and such other relevant provisions). The city is providing this exemption to further the goals of promoting functions served by such organizations for the good of the city and its citizens. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect, in any way, any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-7)) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 22-25. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.), by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-8)) 
Sec. 22-26. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-9)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 18, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting the occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay the occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-11)) 
Sec. 22-28. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on or before February 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article, which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which the payment was due, shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-12)) 
State Law reference— Occupational license due day, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16. 
Sec. 22-29. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the clerk of the city and the police department to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The clerk of the city may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The clerk of the city shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the clerk of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charged whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to an additional fine of $100.00. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $10.00 per 30-day period, or part thereof, during which the business or practitioner failed to file a return or during which the business or practitioner permitted an untruthful return to be on file with the city. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person, the business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(2), § 1(18-13)) 
Secs. 22-30—22-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance license taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-47. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-48, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company that is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-48. - Insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 2) 
Sec. 22-49. - Independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-47, in the amount of $15.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 3) 
Sec. 22-50. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state, in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-47. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 4) 
Sec. 22-51. - Gross premiums tax imposed on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-47. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 5) 
Sec. 22-52. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-47 and 22-48 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 12-20-1994(1), § 6) 
Secs. 22-53—22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES LICENSES 

Sec. 22-70. - Definitions. 
The following terms and words are hereby defined and shall be interpreted as follows: 
Beer shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The word does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. The term "beer" shall be synonymous with "malt beverage." 
City shall mean the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Commercial district shall mean any zoning district in the city starting with the letter "C". 
Corporation shall include both "S" corporation and "C" corporations. 
Licensee shall mean the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners of the partnership and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
Partnership shall include a general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, and limited liability limited partnership. 
Premises shall mean the building described in the application for a license issued hereunder to any licensee; provided, however, this definition shall not include the property or grounds upon which said building is located. 
Retail beer dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that engages in selling or handling of beer, as hereinabove defined, at retail within the city. 
Retail establishment shall mean a convenience store, grocery store, pharmacy. 
Retail wine dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that engages in selling or handling wines, as hereinabove defined, at retail within the city. 
Wholesale beer dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that sells and/or deals in beer, as hereinabove defined, to a retail beer dealer, as defined above, to or within the city. 
Wholesale wine dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that sells and/or deals in wine, as hereinabove defined, to a retail wine dealer, as defined above, to or within the city. 
Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-71. - Requirement of license. 
Beer and wine may be sold or distributed in the city only under a license granted by the city, upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. The city is empowered to grant the following classes of licenses: 
(1)  License for the retail sale of beer only; 
(2)  License for the retail sale of wine only; 
(3)  Combination license for the retail sale of beer and wine; 
(4)  License for the wholesale sale and distribution of beer only; 
(5)  License for the wholesale sale and distribution of wine only; and 
(6)  Combination license for the wholesale sale and distribution of beer and wine. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-72. - Application for sale or distribution. 
All persons desiring to sell or distribute beer and/or wine shall make application on the forms prescribed by the city. The content of all applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer qualified to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-73. - Location requirements. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person unless the premises of the proposed location is situated: 
(1)  300 feet or more from the property line of any church, synagogue, shrine, or other place used exclusively for religious services, including the chapel of a mortuary or cemetery; or 
(2)  300 feet or more from the property line of any school ground or college campus. The schools and colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, city, church, or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and shall not include schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations, karate and other martial arts, performing arts, and other special subjects are taught; or 
(3)  100 feet or more from the property line of any private residence, unless such residence is itself in a commercial district; or 
(4)  300 feet or more from the property line of an alcoholic treatment center. 
(5)  100 feet or more from the property line of any branch of any public library. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route which provides the closest and most reasonable means of travel on the ground to the front door entrance of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008; Res. of 8-20-2008, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 22-74. - Location limited to commercial district. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person unless the premises of the proposed location is situated in a commercial zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-75. - Visibility of entrance. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to a retail beer dealer or retail wine dealer or retail beer and wine dealer unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-76. - Off-premises consumption required. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person except for the sale or distribution of beer and/or wine in sealed containers and for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-77. - Retail sales required. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person for the retail sale of beer and/or wine unless the premises of the proposed location is a retail establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of staple foodstuffs, household supplies, meats, produce and dairy products. 
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that this requirement is met on an annual basis and to maintain all records necessary for a validation thereof by designated city officials. A licensee's failure to maintain the required sales ratio shall constitute grounds for the revocation of such license. A licensee's failure to maintain sales and financial records sufficient to show compliance with the sales ratio required by this section shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-78. - Age/criminal record of applicant. 
Any applicant for a license under this article shall be 25 years of age or older, an American citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, and have resided in the State of Georgia for a period of one year. No applicant shall have been convicted of, pled guilty to or pled nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor charge, other than traffic offenses, within ten years of the date of submission of the application, nor shall any such applicant have been incarcerated, on probation or on parole within five years preceding the date of submission of the application as a result of any felony conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere. Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the requirements of this section shall apply to all of the applicant's partners, officers, directors, and majority shareholders. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-79. - Application contents. 
The license application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business location; the type of business to be conducted; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, the names of the directors, officers, and shareholders, the name and address of the corporation's agent for service of process, and the name and address of any other person or entity having a financial interest in the entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-80. - Surveyor certification. 
All original applications for new licenses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed or existing premises, and stating both the straight line distance and the distance measured along the closest and most reasonable public access from the front door of the proposed or existing premises of the licensee to the building and property line of the nearest church, school, library, alcoholic treatment center, and private residence. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-81. - Compliance of new commercial structure required. 
Where a building intended for the sale of beer and/or wine is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clear compliance with all provisions of this article and applicable provisions of the City Code. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment, however, until it has been completed in accordance with such plans. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-82. - Application fee. 
Each application for a retail beer dealer license or retail wine dealer license or combination retail beer dealer and retail wine dealer license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-83. - State license required. 
(a)  A wholesale beer dealer license or wholesale wine dealer license or combination wholesale beer dealer and wholesale wine dealer license shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute beer or wine or both, as a wholesale dealer of such products. 
(b)  A retail beer dealer license or retail wine dealer license or combination retail beer dealer and retail wine dealer license shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute beer or wine or both, as a retail dealer of such products. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-84. - Fingerprints. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c), each license application shall be accompanied by a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-85. - Investigation of applicant/applicant consent thereto. 
After receipt of an application in proper form, the city shall direct an investigation to verify the contents of the application and ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. The applicant shall be given written notice of any additional data which may be required to facilitate or complete the verification process. The city manager shall prepare or direct the preparation of a report and recommendation and deliver same to the city council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-86. - Procedure for approval. 
After all procedures called for under this ordinance have been completed, the application shall be administratively reviewed by the city council. If it is determined that the applicant meets all standards and requirements of this article, then the license applied for shall be granted upon payment of the applicable license fee(s), unless some specific cause related to location, traffic condition, or other environmental condition shall justify refusal, and the city shall deliver by mail to the applicant a writing evidencing such approval. If it is determined that the application fails to meet all standards and requirements of this article, it shall be rejected and the applicant shall be notified by mail of the rejection stating the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-87. - Issuance of license to corporation. 
Where an applicant is a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority shareholder, if an individual. Where the majority shareholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its president, as evidenced in the corporation's articles of incorporation. Where an applicant is a limited liability company, the license shall be issued to one of the company's members or managers. Where an applicant is a partnership, the license shall be issued to one of the partners, if an individual. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-88. - Corporation registered agent in city required. 
All licensees shall have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent upon whom any required process and/or notice may be served. The licensee shall file the name of such agent along with the written consent of such agent with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-89. - Request for hearing. 
Within 30 days of the city council's written decision to deny an application under this article, the applicant may file a request for a hearing before the city council to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-90. - Restriction on submittal of subsequent applications. 
An unsuccessful applicant for a license under this article may not submit a new application for the same location for 12 months after the date of the original application. An unsuccessful applicant may submit a new application for a different location at any time after final rejection of the prior application. No applicant shall have more than one application outstanding at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-91. - Annual license fees. 
All licenses issued shall be for the calendar year and shall be paid in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The fee for a retail beer dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for a retail beer dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(2)  The fee for a wholesale beer dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for a wholesale beer dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(3)  The fee for a retail wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for a retail wine deal license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(4)  The fee for a wholesale wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for a wholesale wine dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(5)  The fee for a combination retail beer dealer and retail wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $750.00. The prorated fee for a combination retail beer dealer and retail wine dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $450.00. 
(6)  The fee for a combination wholesale beer dealer and wholesale wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $750.00. The prorated fee for a combination wholesale beer dealer and wholesale wine dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $450.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-92. - License expiration. 
All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year unless renewed as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-93. - Renewal application. 
(a)  Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file an application and submit the requisite license fees to the city manager on the form prescribed by the city manager. Applications for renewal shall be filed before December 1 of each year. Renewal applications shall be reviewed by the city manager and upon investigation if there is no change in the ownership of licensee and no adverse reports from those agencies or departments required to inspect the premises of the licensee, the city manager shall issue a renewal license for the ensuing year, upon payment of the applicable license fee(s); and 
(b)  No new or renewal licenses shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes as hereinafter set forth, business license fees, or any other taxes or fees which are owned to the city by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-94. - Excise tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon and levied against every licensed wholesale beer dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  The excise tax levied and imposed in this section with respect to malt beverages sold or distributed by such wholesalers in the city to retailers doing business in the city shall be paid by such licensed wholesale dealers to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of by such licensed wholesale dealer. Every licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed upon and levied against every licensed wholesale wine dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, a tax of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise tax levied and imposed in this section with respect to wine sold or distributed by such wholesalers in the city to retailers doing business in the city shall be paid by such licensed wholesale dealers to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the wine is sold or disposed of by such licensed wholesale dealer. Every licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax imposed by Section 23 shall file a report with the city manager itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-95. - Hours of sale and/or delivery. 
(a)  Retail beer and/or retail wine dealers shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday; 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to make wholesale deliveries of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; and 
(c)  The retail sale of beer and/or wine is authorized on any election days. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-96. - Limitation on signage. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electronic, advertising the sale of beer or wine shall be permitted on the exterior of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the sale of beer or wine. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-97. - Limitation on license transfer. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to the licensee. No license shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. 
(c)  If a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date determined to be the date of severance or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, which shall first occur. This section shall not apply, however, to the withdrawal of one or more partners licensees from a partnership in favor of one or more partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(d)  A license issued hereunder shall be revoked by operation of law whenever partners are added to a partnership who were not partners of the partnership at the time of the issuance of the license, members or managers of a limited liability company ("LLC") are added to the LLC who were not members or managers of the LLC at the time of the issuance of the license, or officers, directors, or majority shareholders are added to a corporation who were not officers, directors, or majority shareholders of the corporation at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(e)  No transfer of a license to a new location shall be permitted where such move is made other than as a result of the exercise of eminent domain. Any change which is a result of the exercise of eminent domain shall authorize the transfer of a license to a new location, provided that such location meets all the qualifying criteria for a location in an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-98. - License as privilege. 
Any license issued hereunder shall be a mere grant of the privilege, and not a right, to carry on such licensed business during the term of such license or permit, subject to compliance with all the terms and conditions imposed by this article, or imposed by any other ordinance, resolution, or code provision of the City of Milner, Georgia; and any such license shall be subject to revocation or suspension at any time or times by the governing authority of the city without the refund of any license fee paid by the licensee; and the violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-99. - Revocation by state. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any license of any licensee to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to sell alcoholic beverages shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any city officer. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-100. - Revocation by city. 
The city council may suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder upon a finding after a hearing before the city council that the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee, acting within the scope of his employment, violated any provision of this article or violated any law, state or federal, pertaining to the conduct of the licensee's business. The city shall give the licensee at least three days' written notice of a hearing conducted pursuant to this section. Hearings under this section shall be transcribed by a court reporter, whose services shall be paid for by the licensee. The licensee shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses. After hearing the evidence, the city council shall decide by majority vote whether a license should be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 22-101. - No refund of fee upon revocation. 
Where a license issued hereunder is revoked pursuant to any provision of this article, the licensee shall not be entitled to any refund of license fees. 
(Ord. No. 08-5, § 2, 6-11-2008) 
Secs. 22-102—22-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BEER AND WINE SALES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 22-130. - Definitions. 
The following terms and words are hereby defined and shall be interpreted, as follows: 
Beer shall mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The word does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. The term "beer" shall be synonymous with "malt beverage." 
City shall mean the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Commercial district shall mean any zoning district in the city starting with the letter "C". 
Corporation shall include both "S" corporation and "C" corporations. 
Licensee shall mean the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners of the partnership and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
On-premises consumption retail beer dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that engages in selling or handling of beer, as hereinabove defined, at retail for consumption on the licensee's premises within the city. 
On-premises consumption retail wine dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that engages in selling or handling of wine, as hereinafter defined, at retail for consumption on the licensee's premises within the city. 
Partnership shall include a general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, and limited liability limited partnership. 
Premises shall mean the building described in the application for a license issued hereunder to any licensee; provided, however, this definition shall not include the property or grounds upon which said building is located. 
Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and a seating capacity for at least 40 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food to its customers. At least one meal per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted on the licensee's premises, with the sale of any beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises, only being incidental thereto; provided further that beer and wine shall be sold only in conjunction with the serving of food. 
Wholesale beer dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that sells and/or deals in beer, as hereinabove defined, to an on-premises consumption retail beer dealer, as hereinabove defined, to or within the city. 
Wholesale wine dealer shall mean and include every person, firm, corporation or association that sells and/or deals in wine, as hereinabove defined, to an on-premises consumption retail wine dealer, as hereinafter defined, to or within the city. 
Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with sale or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-100), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-131. - Requirement of license. 
Beer and wine may be sold or distributed in the city only under a license granted by the city, upon the terms and conditions provided in this article. In addition to these licenses identified in chapter 22, section 22-77, the city is empowered to grant the following classes of licenses: 
(1)  License for the retail sale of beer for on-premises consumption; 
(2)  License for the retail sale of wine for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-101), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-132. - Application for sale or distribution. 
All persons desiring to sell beer and/or wine shall make application on the forms prescribed by the city. The content of all applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer qualified to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-102), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-133. - Location requirements. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person unless the premises of the proposed location is situated: 
(1)  300 feet or more from the property line of any church, synagogue, shrine, or other place used exclusively for religious services, including the chapel of a mortuary or cemetery; 
(2)  300 feet or more from the property line of any school ground or college campus. The schools and colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, city, church, or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and shall not include schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations, karate and other martial arts, performing arts, and other special subjects are taught; 
(3)  100 feet or more from the property line of any private residence, unless such residence is itself in a commercial district; 
(4)  100 feet or more from the property line of an alcoholic treatment center; and 
(5)  100 feet or more from the property line of any branch of any public library. 
(6)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-103), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-134. - Location limited to commercial district. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to any person unless the premises of the proposed location is situated in a commercially zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-104), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-135. - Visibility of entrance. 
No license shall be granted hereunder to an on-premises consumption retail beer dealer or an on-premises consumption retail wine dealer unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-105), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-136. - Package sales prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages may be sold by the package from the premises licensed for the sale of beer and wine for on-premises consumption; provided that this provision shall not prohibit the serving of a single can or bottle of beer or wine to any patron for consumption on the premises where such sale is otherwise lawful. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-106), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-137. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
All beer and wine sold by a licensee hereunder shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase beer and wine on the licensed premises and remove them. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person who purchases beer and wine removes them from the premises in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-107), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-138. - Retail sales permitted in restaurants; minimum percentage of nonalcoholic sales. 
Any license granted to any on-premises consumption retail beer dealer or on-premises consumption retail wine dealer shall be for on-premises consumption which derives at least 51 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that this requirement is met on an annual basis and to maintain all records necessary for a validation thereof by designated city officials. A licensee's failure to maintain the required sales ratio shall constitute grounds for the revocation of such license. The city shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to inspect licensee's records and books for the purpose of determining compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-108), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-139. - Filing reports. 
Each licensee shall file with the city manager a copy of the licensee's monthly state sales tax report as filed with the state department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-109), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-140. - Sales audit. 
In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in sections 22-108 and 22-109, each licensee shall annually furnish to the city manager a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises for the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-110), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-141. - Serving of standing customers at bars prohibited. 
No licensee may serve any customer who is not seated at a table, provided that nothing shall prohibit being served while standing at a bar or counter where beer and/or wine is sold in conjunction with the serving of food. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-111), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-142. - Age/criminal record of applicant. 
Any applicant for a license under this ordinance shall be 25 years of age or older, an American citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, and have resided in the State of Georgia for a period of one year. No applicant shall have been convicted of, pled guilty to or pled nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor charge, other than traffic offenses, within ten years of the date of submission of the application, nor shall any such applicant have been incarcerated, on probation or on parole within five years preceding the date of submission of the application as a result of any felony conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere. Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the requirements of this section shall apply to all of the applicant's partners, officers, directors, and majority shareholders. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-112), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-143. - Application contents. 
The license application shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business location; the type of business to be conducted; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; and if a corporation, the names of the directors, officers, and shareholders, the name and address of the corporation's agent for service of process, and the name and address of any other person or entity having a financial interest in the entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-113), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-144. - Surveyor certification. 
All original applications for new licenses shall include a certificate from a registered surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed or existing premises, and stating both the straight line distance and the distance measured along the closest and most reasonable public access from the proposed or existing premises to the building and property line of the nearest church, school, library, alcoholic treatment center, and private residence. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-114), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-145. - Compliance of new commercial structure required. 
Where a building intended for the sale of beer and/or wine is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clear compliance with all provisions of this article and applicable provisions of the City Code. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment, however, until it has been completed in accordance with such plans. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-115), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-146. - Application fee. 
Each application for an on-premises consumption retail beer dealer license or an on-premises consumption retail wine dealer license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-116), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-147. - State license required. 
A wholesale beer dealer license or wholesale wine dealer license shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the State of Georgia to sell and distribute beer or wine or both, as a wholesale dealer of such products. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-117), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-148. - Fingerprints. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(c), each license application shall be accompanied by a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-118), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-149. - Investigation of applicant/applicant consent thereto. 
After receipt of an application in proper form, the city shall direct an investigation to verify the contents of the application and ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. The applicant shall be given written notice of any additional data which may be required to facilitate or complete the verification process. The city manager shall prepare or direct the preparation of a report and recommendation and deliver same to the city council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-119), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-150. - Procedure for approval. 
After all procedures called for under this ordinance have been completed, the application shall be administratively reviewed by the city council. If it is determined that the applicant meets all standards and requirements of this article, then the license applied for shall be granted upon payment of the applicable license fee(s), unless some specific cause related to location, traffic condition, or other environmental condition shall justify refusal, and the city shall deliver by mail to the applicant a writing evidencing such approval. If it is determined that the application fails to meet all standards and requirements of this article, it shall be rejected and the applicant shall be notified by mail of the rejection stating the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-120), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-151. - Issuance of license to corporation. 
Where an applicant is a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority shareholder, if an individual. Where the majority shareholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its president, as evidenced in the corporation's articles of incorporation. Where an applicant is a limited liability company, the license shall be issued to one of the company's members or managers. Where an applicant is a partnership, the license shall be issued to one of the partners, if an individual. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-121), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-152. - Corporation registered agent in city required. 
All licensees that are corporations shall have and continuously maintain in the city a registered agent upon whom any required process and/or notice may be served. The licensee shall file the name of such agent along with the written consent of such agent with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-122), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-153. - Request for hearing. 
Within 30 days of the city council's written decision to deny an application under this article, the applicant may file a request for a hearing before the city council to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-123), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-154. - Restriction on submittal of subsequent applications. 
An unsuccessful applicant for a license under this article may not submit a new application for the same location for 12 months after the date of the original application. An unsuccessful applicant may submit a new application for a different location at any time after final rejection of the prior application. No applicant shall have more than one application outstanding at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-124), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-155. - Annual license fees. 
All licenses issued shall be for the calendar year, and shall be paid in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The fee for an on-premises consumption retail beer dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for an on-premises consumption retail beer dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(2)  The fee for a wholesale beer dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $100.00. The prorated fee for a wholesale beer dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $75.00. 
(3)  The fee for an on-premises consumption retail wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $500.00. The prorated fee for an on-premises consumption retail wine deal license issued after July 1 shall be $300.00. 
(4)  The fee for a wholesale wine dealer license issued prior to or on July 1 shall be $1,000.00. The prorated fee for a wholesale wine dealer license issued after July 1 shall be $600.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-125), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-156. - License expiration. 
All licenses issued hereunder shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year unless renewed as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-126), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-157. - Renewal application. 
(a)  Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file an application and submit the requisite license fees to the city manager on the form prescribed by the city manager. Applications for renewal shall be filed before December 1 of each year. Renewal applications shall be reviewed by the city manager and upon investigation if there is no change in the ownership of licensee and no adverse reports from those agencies or departments required to inspect the premises of the licensee, the city manager shall issue a renewal license for the ensuing year, upon payment of the applicable license fee(s); and 
(b)  No new or renewal licenses shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to, property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes as hereinafter set forth, business license fees, or any other taxes or fees which are owed to the city by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-127), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-158. - Excise tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon and levied against every licensed wholesale beer dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  The excise tax levied and imposed in this section is levied and imposed with respect to malt beverages sold or distributed by such wholesalers in the city to retailers doing business in the city. The excise tax provided for in this section shall be paid by such licensed wholesale dealers to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of by such licensed wholesale dealer. Every licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax imposed by this section shall file a report with the city itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. 
(c)  There is hereby imposed upon and levied against every licensed wholesale wine dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, a tax of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise tax levied and imposed in this section is levied and imposed with respect to wine sold or distributed by such wholesalers in the city to retailers doing business in the city. The excise tax provided for in this section shall be paid by such licensed wholesale dealers to the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the wine is sold or disposed of by such licensed wholesale dealer. Every licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax imposed by this section shall file a report with the city manager itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-128), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-159. - Hours of sale and/or delivery. 
(a)  On-premises consumption retail beer dealers and on-premises consumption retail wine dealers shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m., Monday through Saturday; 
(b)  There shall be no sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday; 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to make wholesale deliveries of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; and 
(d)  The retail sale of beer and/or wine is authorized on any election days. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-129), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-160. - "Happy hour" promotions. 
It is the intent of the section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." No licensee under this chapter, or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the permanent reduction of the price of a drink or drinks up to one-half the price customarily charged; 
(4)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another such beverage is purchased or before the first beverage has been consumed by any one person; 
(5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage; or 
(6)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-130), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-161. - Limitation on signage. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electronic, advertising any price of beer or wine shall be permitted on the exterior of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any beer or wine sold therein. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-131), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-162. - Limitation on license transfer. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal to the licensee. No license shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, whichever shall first occur. 
(c)  If a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date determined to be the date of severance or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new licensee, which shall first occur. This section shall not apply, however, to the withdrawal of one or more partners licensees from a partnership in favor of one or more partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(d)  A license issued hereunder shall be revoked by operation of law whenever partners are added to a partnership who were not partners of the partnership at the time of the issuance of the license, members or managers of a limited liability company ("LLC") are added to the LLC who were not members or managers of the LLC at the time of the issuance of the license, or officers, directors, or majority shareholders are added to a corporation who were not officers, directors, or majority shareholders of the corporation at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(e)  No transfer of a license to a new location shall be permitted where such move is made other than as a result of the exercise of eminent domain. Any change which is a result of the exercise of eminent domain shall authorize the transfer of a license to a new location, provided that such location meets all the qualifying criteria for a location in an initial application. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-132), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-163. - License as privilege. 
Any license issued hereunder shall be a mere grant of the privilege, and not a right, to carry on such licensed business during the term of such license or permit, subject to compliance with all the terms and conditions imposed by this article, or imposed by any other ordinance, resolution, of code provision of the City of Milner, Georgia; and any such license shall be subject to revocation or suspension at any time or times by the governing authority of the city without the refund of any license fee paid by the licensee; and the violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for immediate revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(21-34), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-164. - Revocation by state. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any license of any licensee to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to sell alcoholic beverages shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any city officer. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-133), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-165. - Revocation by city. 
The city council may suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder upon a finding after a hearing before the city council that the licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee, acting within the scope of his employment, violated any provision of this article or violated any law, state or federal, pertaining to the conduct of the licensee's business. The city shall give the licensee at least three days written notice of a hearing conducted pursuant to this section. Hearings under this section shall be transcribed by a court reporter, whose services shall be paid for by the licensee. The licensee shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses. After hearing the evidence, the city council shall decide by majority vote whether a license should be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-134), 3-18-2009) 
Sec. 22-166. - No refund of fee upon revocation. 
Where a license issued hereunder is revoked pursuant to any provision of this article, the licensee shall not be entitled to any refund of license fees. 
(Ord. No. 09-1, § 2(22-135), 3-18-2009) 
Secs. 22-167—22-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH FRANCHISE FEES 

Sec. 22-190. - Application for placement of lines and facilities in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Any telegraph or telephone company that places or seeks to place lines and facilities in the public roads, highways or rights-of-way shall provide to the city the following information, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(1): 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of a principal office and local agent of such telegraph or telephone company; 
(2)  Proof of certification from the Georgia Public Service Commission of such telegraph or telephone company to provide telecommunications services in this state; 
(3)  Proof of insurance or self-insurance of such telegraph or telephone company adequate to defend and cover claims of third parties and of city authorities; 
(4)  A description of the telegraph or telephone company's service area, which description shall be sufficiently detailed so as to allow the city to respond to subscriber inquiries. For the purposes of this section, a telegraph or telephone company may, in lieu of or as supplement to a written description, provide a map on 8½ by 11 inch paper that is clear and legible and that fairly depicts the service area within the boundaries of the city. If such service area is less than the boundaries of the city, the map shall describe the boundaries of the geographic area to be served in clear and concise terms; 
(5)  A description of the services to be provided; 
(6)  An affirmative declaration that the telegraph or telephone company shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including city ordinances and regulations, regarding the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights of way that are reasonable, nondiscriminatory, and applicable to all users of the public rights-of-way, including the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 9, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act"; and 
(7)  A statement in bold type at the top of the application as follows: "Pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of Code Section 46-5-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, the city shall notify the applicant of any deficiencies in this application within 15 business days of receipt of this application." 
(b)  The city shall notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of any application deemed incomplete; such notice shall specifically identify all application deficiencies. If no such notification is given within 15 business days of the receipt of an application, such application shall be deemed complete. 
(c)  Within 60 calendar days of the receipt of a completed application, the city may adopt such application by adoption of a resolution or ordinance or by notification to the telegraph or telephone company. The failure of the city to adopt an application within 60 calendar days of the receipt of a completed application shall constitute final adoption of such application. 
(d)  If it modifies its service area or provisioned services identified in the original application, the telegraph or telephone company shall notify the city of changes to the service area or the services provided. Such notice shall be given at least 20 days prior to the effective date of such change. Such notification shall contain a geographic description of the new service area or areas and new services to be provided within the jurisdiction of the city, if any. The city shall provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in the city's corporate boundaries which, for the purposes of this Code section, shall become effective 30 days following receipt. 
(e)  An application adopted pursuant to this section may be terminated by a telegraph or telephone company by submitting a notice of termination to the city. For purposes of this section, such notice shall identify the telegraph or telephone company, the affected service area, and the effective date of such termination, which shall not be less than 60 calendar days from the date of filing the notice of termination. 
(f)  Any telegraph or telephone company that has previously obtained permits for the placement of its facilities, has specified the name of such telegraph or telephone company in such permit application, has previously placed its facilities in any public right-of-way, and has paid and continues to pay any applicable city occupational license taxes, permit fees, franchise fees, except as set forth in subsection (h) or, if applicable, county permit fees shall be deemed to have complied with this section without any further action on the part of such telegraph or telephone company except as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8), (9), (11), and (17). 
(g)  Noncompliance. 
(1)  Any telegraph or telephone company that has placed lines and facilities in the public roads and highways or rights of way of the city without first obtaining permits or otherwise notifying the city of its presence in the public roads and highways or rights-of-way shall provide the information required by paragraph (a) of this subsection, if applicable, to the city on or before the expiration of 90 days from the effective date of this article. 
(2)  After the expiration of 90 days from the effective date of this article, if any telegraph or telephone company, other than those who meet the requirements of paragraph (f) of this subsection, has failed or fails to provide the information required by paragraph (a) of this subsection to the city, the city shall provide written notice to such telegraph or telephone company giving that company 15 calendar days from the date of receipt of such notice to comply with this section. 
(3)  In the event the 15-calendar-day cure period expires without compliance, the city may petition the Georgia Public Service Commission which shall, after an opportunity for a hearing, order the appropriate relief. 
(h)  Existing franchise agreement. 
(1)  In the event any telegraph or telephone company has an existing, valid city franchise agreement as of the effective date of this article, the terms and conditions of such existing franchise agreement shall only remain effective and enforceable until the expiration of the existing agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever shall first occur. 
(2)  In the event any telegraph or telephone company is paying an existing occupational license tax or fee, based on actual recurring local services revenues, as of the effective date of this article, such payment shall be considered the payment of due compensation without further action on the part of the city. 
(3)  In the event that the rate of such existing tax or fee exceeds three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, that rate shall remain effective until December 31, 2012; thereafter, the payment by such telegraph or telephone company at the rate of three percent shall be considered the payment of due compensation without further action on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 1(22-61), 10-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-191. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first; and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's corporate boundaries, the payment by such company to city in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(c)  Any due compensation paid in accordance with this section shall be in lieu of any other permit fee in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(10). 
(d)  The city hereby incorporates the calculation of "due compensation" assessment upon retail, end user customers, and notice of nonpayment provisions codified in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 1(22-62), 10-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-192. - Actual recurring local service revenues. 
(a)  "Recurring local service revenues", as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, means those revenues customarily included in the uniform system of accounts as prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission for class "A" and "B" companies; provided, however, that only the local service portion of the following accounts shall be included, for example: 
(1)  Basic local service revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5000; 
(2)  Basic area revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5001; 
(3)  Optional extended area revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 2.5002; 
(4)  Public telephone revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5010; 
(5)  Local private line revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 35.5040; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to audio and video program transmission service where both terminals of the private line are within the corporate limits of the city shall not be included; 
(6)  Other local exchange revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5060; 
(7)  Local exchange service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5069; 
(8)  Network access revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5080; 
(9)  Directory revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5320; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to revenue derived from listings in portion of directories not considered white pages shall not be included; 
(10)  Nonregulated operating revenue, as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 32.5280; provided, however, that the portion of such accounts attributable to revenues derived from private lines shall not be included; and 
(11)  Uncollectible revenue, as defined in 47 § C.F.R. 32.5300. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 1(22-63), 10-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-193. - Authorized designee. 
The city clerk shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq., and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in the city's corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, § 1(22-64), 10-13-2010) 
Secs. 22-194—22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BODY ART RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-201. - Body art rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for body art studios and body artists adopted by the Lamar County Board of Health, as amended, are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article as if fully rewritten herein. Said rules and regulations shall be enforced by the City of Milner, and any violations thereof may be tried in the municipal court of the city or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Secs. 22-202—22-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-211. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  It is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called nude bars or establishments offering so-called nude entertainment or adult entertainment, leads to an increase in the surrounding area of criminal behavior and creates undesirable community conditions, blight and diminution in property values. 
(b)  Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, and live commercial nudity in general, are disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of public officials. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, and commercial nudity in general, are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. 
(c)  Accordingly, it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to reduce the adverse impact of adult entertainment establishments by limiting the number of such uses, so as to reduce the negative impacts of adult entertainment establishments upon other business uses, neighborhood property values, residential areas and public and semi-public uses; to insure that adult entertainment establishments do not impede development, redevelopment and neighborhood revitalization efforts; and so as to avoid allowing adult entertainment establishments in heavily used public pedestrian areas. 
(d)  Therefore, the limitation of adult entertainment to certain prescribed areas of the city is in the public welfare, and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide or establish adult entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features live dancers on the premises engaged in displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall mean and include adult dancing establishments, exotic dance establishments, adult bookstore, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture arcades, and adult video stores. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building used for presenting motion pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, DVDs or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Exotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances on the premises by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals of either males or females, or any portion of the areola of the female breast. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty. 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals, in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-213. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 4.13 of the City Charter. 
(b)  In addition to fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(c)  Any person who holds an adult entertainment establishment license must also comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws or regulations otherwise pertaining to these establishments, and failure to so comply shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-214. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-215. - Permitted locations. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall be allowed only in areas zoned M-1 under the city's zoning ordinance fronting on Georgia Highway 7/U.S. Highway 41. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-216. - Other locational requirements. 
Adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance, this article and the following standards of use: 
(1)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one acre. 
(2)  In addition to zoning development standards governing commercial zoning districts, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be separated at least 40 feet from any other business establishment and the minimum rear yard shall be 50 feet. 
(3)  In addition to the development standards of the zoning ordinance, adult entertainment establishments shall be separated at least 300 feet from any parcel either used or zoned for residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-217. - Admission of minors. 
No adult entertainment licensee shall permit the admission of persons under the age of 18 onto the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-218. - Sales to minors. 
No person shall sell, display, barter or give, or offer to sell, display, barter or give to any person under the age of 18 any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-219. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person physically present on the premises of an adult bookstore, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater or adult video store shall publicly display, expose, or permit the public display or exposure of any specified anatomical area. No person physically present on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment shall engage in any lewd or obscene behavior constituting a violation of the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-220. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-221. - Regulations pertaining to adult dancing establishments and exotic dance establishments. 
(a)  Any person licensed as an adult dancing establishment or an exotic dance establishment shall comply with the following rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of such facility: 
(1)  No licensee shall offer adult entertainment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted on the premises. 
(3)  No patron shall be permitted to touch, fondle or caress any performer, nor shall any performer be permitted to touch, fondle or caress a patron. No employee shall be permitted to fondle or caress any patron, nor shall any patron be permitted to fondle or caress any employee. 
(4)  No tips for performers or employees shall be placed by a patron on the person of the performer or employee. 
(5)  All live performers shall be restricted to fixed stages, and no patron shall be permitted on such stages for any purpose. "Fixed stage" shall be defined as a raised floor area or stage at least four feet high and designed exclusively for, and used only by, performers. Tables used for seating and service to customers do not meet these standards and shall not be used for performing purposes. 
(6)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(7)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(8)  No licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages to be served, offered or consumed on the licensed premises or in any parking area dedicated to the use of the licensed premises. 
(9)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot-candles per square foot. 
(10)  An adult dancing establishment and exotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(11)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(12)  No person physically present on the premises, other than a live performer performing in accordance with the standards of this section, shall publicly display, expose, or permit the public display or exposure of any specified anatomical area. 
(b)  No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult dancing establishment or an exotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-222. - Clearance of employees and contractors. 
(a)  No person may be employed or allowed to work as an independent contractor by an establishment holding a license under this article until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued a letter of clearance by the police department indicating the person has not, within the preceding five years, been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any law catalogued by section 22-234. A letter of compliance shall be issued by the police department indicating the person is eligible for such employment. This letter must be kept on file at the licensed establishment where such person may be working or performing. This section shall apply to all performers, entertainers, musicians and persons engaged in temporary work or independent contracting, as well as regular employees. 
(b)  The police department shall have a search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted. If there is a violation of laws as catalogued in section 22-234, the police department shall issue a letter to the person fingerprinted stating that the person is ineligible for employment. This determination may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(c)  Any letter of eligibility for employment issued hereunder shall expire 12 months from the date of issue. The mayor and council may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility of employment. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Secs. 22-223—22-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 22-231. - Required. 
Any person who owns or operates an adult entertainment establishment shall be required to obtain a license under this article. No person shall be permitted to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless and until such a license is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-232. - Application procedures. 
To obtain an adult entertainment establishment license, the applicant must: 
(1)  Complete the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof; and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, the same shall be cause for revocation. 
(2)  Provide documentation to prove that the applicant meets or exceeds the conditions of zoning pertaining to the property to be licensed; and provide an as-built survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer depicting the location of the structure which will operate as the adult entertainment establishment. Prior to the issuance of such license, the as-built survey shall be submitted to the building inspector for a determination as to whether the proposed site meets the standards set forth in the conditions of zoning and this article. 
(3)  Furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all owners of sole proprietorships, all officers and owners of ten percent or more shares of any corporation, and all partners of any partnership. 
(4)  Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by the mayor and council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(5)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-233. - Investigation; conditions for issuance. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application for a license under this division and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application, applicant, and proposed operation conform in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(6)  That on the date of the business for which a license is required herein commences and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(7)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, county, state or the United States; 
(8)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-234. - Denial. 
No person shall be granted a license under this article if the person, or any partner, officer or owner of ten percent or more of the shares of or any interest in any such business, firm, partnership or corporation has been convicted of or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery, gambling, illegal possession or sale of any narcotics, drugs or chemicals for which the sale thereof is controlled or prohibited by law, the control of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, prostitution, solicitation, or the possession or receiving of stolen property, within a period of 15 years immediately prior to the filing of the application. Should any such person, after a license has been granted be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such crime, such license shall be subject to suspension and revocation. Withdrawal of an owner, officer or partner or enumerated shareholder after pleading guilty or nolo contendere to the above enumerated crimes, shall not necessarily mitigate against the penalty imposed hereby. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-235. - Renewal. 
Licenses issued under this article shall be renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-236. - Fees imposed. 
The fees for an adult entertainment license shall be as set from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-237. - Payment of fee. 
Upon payment of the full license fee, the city shall issue a license authorized as provided in this section; provided that payment of the entire license fee shall be required within 15 days of approval of the license application. Failure to pay such fee within the 15-day period shall result in approval being withdrawn by the city without the necessity of any further action on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-238. - Violations of law not condoned. 
Issuance of a license under this article shall not in any way be deemed to condone or make legal any act prohibited by state or federal law or local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-239. - Transfer. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-240. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by the mayor and council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code and zoning ordinance have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 

Sec. 22-241. - Notice, submission. 
(a)  The applicant or a licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-242. - Council determines procedure. 
(a)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda under this division, the mayor and council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. 
(b)  If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-243. - Council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal under this division before the mayor and council at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant or licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-244. - Power of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure outlined in this division may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence and hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-245. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The mayor and council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this division. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-246. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings and conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee or appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 22-247. - Same—Action of council. 
The mayor and council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-1. - Curfew. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall become effective upon the proclamation of the mayor declaring an emergency to exist, such invocation to be proclaimed only during a time of public danger, public disaster, rioting or other time of existing or impending public hazard. It shall be unlawful for any person, during the following hours of darkness, namely from 9:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. daily, during the present emergency, the dangers of which are eminent, to be and appear in or upon or within 150 feet of any sidewalks, streets, alleys, lanes, schools, recreation areas, or parks in the city, during the aforesaid hours. This section shall be enforced impartially against all persons without regard to race or color. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to any person, who because of reasonable necessity, is or are required to be or appear in or on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, schools, recreation areas and parks in said city during the hours aforesaid. 
(b)  Provided further, this section shall not apply to any person who is within his home or within the curtilage of same, nor to any one in his place of business, attending to the business affairs of said business. Likewise, this section shall not apply to the following businesses of public necessity: public utilities, eating establishments, filling stations and drug stores; however, any such business thus exempted shall be immediately closed by the owner or manager of same should a large, noisy, unruly, boisterous or armed assembly of people congregate either in said business or near thereto. Further, if any person patronizing any such business fails to leave said business immediately upon being served without any delaying tactics, and without idling, or loitering therein or near thereto, and, should any such person otherwise fail to obey the terms of this section, they shall be subject to immediate arrest under the terms and provisions of this section. Any owner or manager of any such exempted business allowing any person to violate the letter or spirit of this section shall ipso facto forfeit the exemption here granted to such business, and such business, as well as such owner or such manager in charge of such business, at the time of such forfeiture, shall likewise be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 19-4) 
Sec. 26-2. - Drunkenness; disorderly conduct. 
Any person who shall be found drunk, or acting in a disorderly or riotous manner or acting in an obscene manner in the streets or elsewhere in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 19-6) 
Sec. 26-3. - Quarreling. 
Any person acting in a disorderly or riotous manner in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior Code, § 19-8) 
Sec. 26-4. - Firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city and upon any lands now owned by said city, whether within or without said corporate limits, except as hereinafter provided. This section shall not prohibit persons from exercising their legal rights of self-defense or defense of others. 
(Prior Code, § 19-9) 
Sec. 26-5. - Loitering or idling prohibited; persons liable. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Loitering and idling mean for any person to be dilatory or slow in movement, or to stand around and move slowly about, or to stand idly around, or to spend time idly, or to linger or lag behind, or walk slowly, or to stand around with, or in a group of five people or more, bearing arms, or to disobey the order of a peace officer or city policeman, to move to a different place, or failure of any such person to disperse upon being instructed so to do by any such peace officer or city police officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter and to be idle, within the meaning of the definition of said words in subsection (a) of this section, upon the streets, alleys, lanes, schools, recreation areas, or parks, and sidewalks, in and out of motor vehicles, in the city, or within a radius of 300 yards of any public building or school in the city. It shall be further unlawful for any person to loiter or be idle upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, recreation areas, or parks, or within a radius of 300 yards of any public building or school in the city. 
(c)  This section shall be of full force against any person who is interfering with the rights of others; who is engaged in disorderly or obnoxious conduct; who is engaged in conduct causing or tending to cause the interruption or impeding of any type of traffic; any congregation of persons resulting in obstruction thereof; or to be engaged in any conduct that tends to endanger the life, person or property of any person; or for any person, who in consort with a group of other persons, are bearing arms. 
(Prior Code, §§ 19-12—19-14) 
Sec. 26-6. - Noises—Loud, unnecessary, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably or unnecessarily either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses. 
(Prior Code, § 19-17) 
Sec. 26-7. - Same—Enumerated. 
The following acts, among others, shall constitute a violation of section 26-6, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for the unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc., for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any musical instruments, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets without a special permit from the city clerk or mayor and council. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(6)  Steam whistle. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device, which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed by the mayor and council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the mayor and council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would not result to any party in interest, the mayor and council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for, or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers, etc. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors that disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Transportation of metal, rails, etc. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(14)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the mayor and council. 
(15)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Prior Code, § 19-18) 
Sec. 26-8. - Peeping Toms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk about the premises and near the private habitations of other persons, or to enter upon the private premises of another to spy or look into the house or building used for residential purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 19-21) 
Sec. 26-9. - Posters, billboards, signs or banners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, post or attach to any tree, telephone or telegraph pole, bridge, building or other structure not owned or controlled by such person within the city, any sign, poster, banner, billboard, paper or other device. 
(Prior Code, § 19-25) 
Sec. 26-10. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any place in which the public generally is invited, allowed or permitted, and includes the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, publicways and parks, as well as theaters, restaurants, hotels, roominghouses, tourist and trailer courts, dance halls, places of entertainment, and other similar places, it being intended that the term "public place" shall be interpreted liberally. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a public place to engage or participate in any obscene or lascivious conduct. 
(Prior Code, § 19-27) 
Sec. 26-11. - Weapons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city, any of the following implements: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives that do not close. 
(4)  Any razor. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Prior Code, § 19-28) 
Chapter 30 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Hazard Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, any person living on any premises shall be deemed an occupant, and any person receiving the rent in whole or in part of any premises shall be deemed an agent; or any premises where construction of any kind is in progress and where employees or workmen eat their meals, in or about said premises or scatter food in or about such premises, the contractor or foreman or other person in charge of any market or stall in any market shall be deemed an occupant. 
Commercial waste means all waste byproducts for manufacturing or commercial establishments, cinders, and ashes from commercial boilers, cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels. 
Garbage means domestic waste composed of meat, vegetables and fruit scraps, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes and other such waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, churches, schools, small business establishments and similar places. 
Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored. 
Trash means and includes yard waste, such as weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, tree limbs and similar items. 
(Prior Code, § 15-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Place of disposal. 
Every person who disposes of any garbage, trash, commercial wastes, whether required to do so by this chapter or not, shall make such disposal at a public landfill. 
(Prior Code, § 15-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Disturbing contents of containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pick from or disturb the contents of any garbage container or vessel or other containers provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 15-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Containers to be covered. 
Garbage containers shall be tightly covered at all times except when momentarily opened to receive the garbage or to have contents removed therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 15-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Specifications for containers. 
Garbage containers shall be equipped with tightfitting covers, rust-proof and moisture-proof. Containers shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. No open boxes or bins will be allowed. All boxes, crates or other bulky material must be compacted into the tightest practical volume before being placed in a container. 
(Prior Code, § 15-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Premises to be kept free from weeds. 
All premises within the city limits, whether vacant or occupied, shall be kept reasonably free and clean of weeds and other growths by the owners, tenants or other persons in possession or control thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 15-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Failure to comply, penalties thereof. 
If any owner, tenant or other person in possession or control of any premises, lots, or part or parcel of lots, within the city limits, shall fail or refuse to cut or remove therefrom weeds or other like growth, within five days after having been notified to do so by the city or its authority, then, and in that event, the owner, tenant or other person in possession or control of such premises, whether vacant or otherwise, shall upon conviction of violation of the provisions of section 30-6 be subject to fine and/or imprisonment, all at the discretion of the city court, not to exceed the limits respecting fines or imprisonment for violations of the ordinances of the city as provided by the Charter thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 15-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Littering of streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit on the streets or on the sidewalks or the streets in the city any garbage, trash, leaves, shrubbery prunings and tree prunings of any kind. 
(Prior Code, § 15-8) 
State Law reference— Litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 30-9. - Vacant lots to be kept clean. 
Every person owning or controlling or in possession of any vacant lots, or parcels of lots within the city limits, shall keep the same clean of all trash, paper, rags, shavings, garbage, rubbish, filth or refuse of any kind or character. 
(Prior Code, § 15-9) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Unauthorized encroachments; procedure. 
Should any person encroach upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property of the city, or the conditions of the construction of any encroachment after the mayor and council have consented thereto, be violated, it shall be the duty of the clerk and treasurer, at the instance of any member of the mayor and council, to issue a summons, directed to such person, commanding him to appear before the mayor and council at a time and place designated therein, to show cause why such encroachment should not be removed. Said summons shall bear test in the name of the mayor, be signed by the clerk and treasurer, and a copy thereof served by the police on said person at least 24 hours before the time appointed for said investigation. At the time appointed, unless a continuance is granted for sufficient legal reasons, the mayor and council shall hear all the legal evidence offered bearing upon the subject matter of the investigation, and determine whether or not the matter complained of is an encroachment as set forth in this article. Should the mayor and council determine that said person has encroached on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public property of the city as complained about, or that the conditions of the construction of any encroachment, authorized by the city, have been violated, it shall be their duty to cause the police to serve such person with written notice to remove said encroachment within three days after said notice is received; and should said person fail or refuse to remove said encroachment within the time prescribed, the mayor and council shall cause the same to be removed at the expense of said person, and the clerk and treasurer when directed by the mayor and council, shall issue execution against said person for the amount of such expense, and the same shall be levied and collected by the police as in the case of tax executions; said person failing or refusing to remove said encroachment within the time prescribed, after being duly notified so to do, shall, on conviction, be punished as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Prior Code, § 25-7) 
Sec. 34-2. - Excavations, etc.; application and permit; agreement; execution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, cut, tear or dig up any pavement or other surface of any street or sidewalk in said city, until said person shall have first applied for and obtained authority in writing, stating just what is to be done and the purpose therefor, which authority may be granted by the clerk or mayor, if they deem it advisable and proper, but only after said applicant shall sign a written agreement to reimburse the city for the expense of repairing any damage done thereby. After the city shall have repaired said damage, the clerk shall render a bill for the cost thereof to the party receiving said permit and doing said damage, and unless paid in ten days therefrom, shall issue an execution for the collection of the same, same as taxes and other demands of said city, and the same shall be made by levy and sale by the chief of police, on any property of said applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 25-9) 
Secs. 34-3—34-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street or other public place. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-24. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Secs. 34-25—34-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 34-52. - Required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade without a parade permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-53. - Application. 
(a)  A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. Such application shall be filed not less than seven days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(13)  Any additional information that the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-54. - Issuance standards. 
The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-55. - Notice of denial. 
If the chief of police disapproves the application for a parade permit, he shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-56. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-57. - Contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-58. - Revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the authority, after a hearing affording due process, to revoke a parade permit upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this division. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Sec. 34-59. - Compliance with laws and regulations. 
A person holding a parade permit shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Prior Code, § 19-20) 
Secs. 34-60—34-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROAD USE AND REGULATION 

Sec. 34-80. - Purpose. 
This Article is made, adopted, and enacted so as to promote the traditional police power goals of health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the community, the lessening of congestion of City roads and streets, security of the public, promotion of health and general welfare of its citizens, protection of the aesthetic qualities of the City, and facilitation of the adequate provision of transportation and other public requirements; and for the purpose of protecting the City's significant investment in rights-of-way, roads, bridges, infrastructure, and improvements to its road system. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Milner, Georgia. 
City road system shall mean all roads, streets, and roadways owned by the city and operated and maintained for the travel and convenience of the public and shall include all bridges, culverts, ditches, drainage structures, rights-of-way, sidewalks, and appurtenances and improvements to the city roads. 
Road means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
Unimproved road system means those roads in the city road system that are not paved. 
Truck means every motor vehicle with more than six wheels or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation or property, goods and material. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-82. - Route of travel; through trucks. 
(a)  All trucks are prohibited from using or parking on any road within the incorporated area of the city which is posted "No through trucks". 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the following: 
(1)  The operation of trucks upon any road, when necessary to the conduct of a business, to a destination point; provided roads upon which such truck traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any road in the city. 
(3)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, Lamar County, the State of Georgia, public utility, public works, or any contractor engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of roads, road improvements, or road utilities within the city. 
(4)  The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the road for which such detour is established. 
(c)  All roads in the city road system shall be designated and posted for "No through trucks" except for the following: 
(1)  Main Street. 
(2)  Old Alabama Road. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-83. - Travel on unimproved roads. 
Trucks shall not travel over any part of the city's unimproved road system during periods of rain or inclement weather when said travel will clearly cause excessive damage and maintenance to the road system such that conditions for the travel of passenger vehicles will be substantially impaired. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-84. - Travel over bridges. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no truck or other vehicle shall be operated over any bridge with a posted weight limit which is less than the total gross weight of the truck or vehicle and its load. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Sec. 34-85. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The City of Milner Police Department shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any truck operating on any restricted road to submit to an inspection of said driver's log book, weight slips, delivery slips, or other written evidence of the truck's point or origin and destination point to justify its presence on a prohibited road. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the City of Milner Municipal Court, or other court of competent jurisdiction, or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or up to 60 days confinement in the Lamar County Jail. 
(Ord. No. 11-5, § 2, 10-12-2011) 
Secs. 34-86—34-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES (PTV) 

Sec. 34-90. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Personal transportation vehicles ("PTV") and other similar vehicles are not generally designed or manufactured to be used on public highways, streets and roads, (hereafter "public roads") and the City of Milner in no way advocates their operation on the public roads within its jurisdiction. Adoption of this article is not to be relied upon as a determination by the city that operation of personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on public roads is safe or advisable, even if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the city accepts no liability in negligence, nuisance or under any other cause of action for losses resulting from the use of personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property under this article. Any person who operates personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles is responsible for procuring appropriate insurance as may be required by state law or this article as a condition of operating personal transportation vehicles and other similar vehicles on the public roads of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 34-91. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
Gross weight means the unladen weight of the vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface, displays a current motor vehicle tag, and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle having no fewer than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour; if such vehicle was authorized to operate on public streets of the city prior to January 1, 2012, it may also be referred to in prior codes and ordinances as a "motorized cart"; and 
(2)  Any motor vehicle with a minimum of four wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,375 pounds and capable of transporting not more than eight persons. 
The term does not include mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, which can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle or multipurpose off-highway vehicle. 
Public road means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel within the boundaries of the city, including streets and alleys. 
Sidewalk means the improved surface or path within the public right-of-way, outside of the roadway intended primarily for the movement of vehicular traffic, that is intended primarily for the movement of pedestrian traffic and other permitted uses. 
Unladen weight means the weight of a vehicle without load as per the manufacturer's specifications for such vehicle. 
Valid driver's license means any current and valid certificate issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits persons to operate motor vehicles on the public roads of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 34-92. - Personal transportation regulations. 
(a)  A PTV or LSV may be operated only on public roads within the city having a posted speed limit of 35 mph or less. 
(b)  PTV's and LSV's shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  The operator of a PTV and LSV shall possess and have on his or her person during all periods of operation a valid driver's license. 
(d)  The maximum occupancy of a PTV while traveling on public roads, shall be one person per designated seat. 
(e)  All operators of PTVs shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the public roads of the city. Where dedicated PTV paths exist for PTV usage in lieu of public roads, they shall be used exclusively in preference to public roads, with the exclusion of privately held paths. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 34-93. - Personal transportation vehicles—minimum equipment required. 
(a)  To be operated on public roads within the city, all personal transportation vehicles shall be equipped with: 
(1)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle, including a parking brake; 
(2)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(3)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the 'off position, or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the 'off position; 
(4)  Head lamps; 
(5)  Reflex reflectors, on front, rear and sides of vehicle; 
(6)  Tail lamps; 
(7)  A horn; 
(8)  A rearview mirror; 
(9)  Safety warning labels, installed by manufacturer or required by law; and 
(10)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof. 
(11)  Before operating a PTV on any roadway in the city, the operator must inspect and have a properly working rotating or flashing amber light affixed at the highest point of the PTV so as to make the PTV visible 360 degrees to all persons and motorists. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the PTV to properly maintain all minimum required equipment at all times and to keep the same in proper working condition. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 2, 11-5-2018) 
Sec. 34-94. - Personal transportation vehicle and low-speed vehicle operator licensing regulations. 
Only those persons possessing a valid driver's license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the public roads of the state may operate a personal transportation vehicle or a low-speed vehicle on the public roads within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 34-95. - Insurance. 
(a)  The owner and operator of a PTV can be sued civilly for negligent operation of a PTV on public roads and recreation paths, which could result in a money judgment against the owner and/or operator. For this reason, the city encourages owners of PTV, and their operators, to seek legal advice from an attorney and to procure liability coverage from an insurance company licensed to operate in Georgia. 
(b)  As required by state law, the owner of a low speed vehicle ("LSV") shall procure motor vehicle liability insurance on the vehicle in the minimum coverages required, and shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the low speed vehicle at all times during the operation of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Sec. 34-96. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this chapter shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided by the Charter and Code of the City of Milner, Georgia, and any applicable state laws. 
(b)  In addition to enforcing sanctions against the operator, any violation of this chapter shall be charged against the registered owner of the vehicle, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the vehicle as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not to exceed $250.00; 
(2)  For the second offense committed within one year of conviction for a first offense, a fine of not to exceed $500.00; and 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a vehicle, a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00, and if a motorized cart the registered owner's motorized cart city registration shall be revoked. The registered owner cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. Additionally, such person shall be prohibited from operating a motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle on the public roads, recreation paths, rights-of-way, or other public property for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Secs. 34-97—34-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING 

Sec. 34-100. - Definitions. 
Heavy vehicle: Any large vehicle, cab, trailer, truck, tractor trailer, dump truck, bus or car carrier (including rollbacks and wreckers), school bus, or any other vehicle whose gross vehicle weight rating is over 26,000 pounds, or a trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating of over 10,000 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, adopted Nov. 5, 2018, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 34-100—34-109, and enacted a new Art. V, as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2018-04, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 2018. 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 38-1. - Rules of the Road. 
The city hereby adopts in its entirety its Rules of the Road, as found in O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), and the definitions in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
(Prior Code, § 30-1) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt rules of road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372 et seq. 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-19. - Connecting private water systems to city water system pipes limited. 
It shall be unlawful to connect any private water system, which takes water from a well, pond, or other independent source, to pipes which are connected with the city water system unless the city gives written permission and such supply and interconnection is then inspected and approved by the state department of public health. 
(Prior Code, § 32.2) 
Sec. 42-20. - Department to make or supervise main extensions. 
The city water department will make, or supervise, all extensions of mains in the public streets, both inside and outside the city limits. 
(Prior Code, § 32.4) 
Sec. 42-21. - Connection to unmetered pipe or city main; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful to make any connection to any unmetered pipe or main containing water from the city system, unless such person has first obtained a written permit for such work from the superintendent or city hall. 
(Prior Code, § 32.5) 
Sec. 42-22. - Bill in renter's name; new service deposits. 
A nonowner (renter) occupying a structure applying for water service will be billed in the renter's name. New service after October 1, 1989, requires a security deposit in the amount determined by the city. Final bill will be deducted from deposit and difference refunded after termination of service. 
(Prior Code, § 32.6) 
Sec. 42-23. - Transfer or purchase of real estate with existing city water supply; responsibility of property owner. 
Real estate transferred or purchased with city water supply already existing shall be considered a new purchase. The property owner is responsible for the rental property water bill when service is listed in property owner's name. 
(Prior Code, § 32.7) 
Sec. 42-24. - Booster pump, installation restricted. 
No booster pump shall be installed in any pipe which is connected to the city water system, except where the usage has been approved by the water department as not detrimental to service in the area and a written permit is issued to that effect. 
(Prior Code, § 32.8) 
Sec. 42-25. - Water taps—Prerequisites. 
The applicant for a water tap shall have his service pipe extended to the property line, at a point designated by the water department and terminating in a stopcock or valve. In consideration of the tapping fee, which shall be paid to the utilities in advance, the city shall tap the main and extend service to the customer's valve at the property line. 
(Prior Code, § 32.9) 
Sec. 42-26. - Same—New construction. 
In cases of new construction, water taps shall be installed immediately and the contractor shall be billed for water consumed during the period of construction. Contractors may install their own meters and lines at no charge with a cut-on fee as provided in section 18-42(a). Water lines will be city property after one year. All installation and equipment must be approved by the water superintendent during all phases of construction. Residences and businesses will be equipped with low-flow fixtures and will have a pressure-reducing valve. 
(Prior Code, § 32.10) 
Sec. 42-27. - Schedules of tap charges. 
(a)  The owner of each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed within the city shall pay fees for connection to the public water system as provided in section 18-42(b). 
(b)  The owner of each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed within the city shall have his water connection extended to the property line at a point designated by the city and pursuant to the specifications and criteria established by the city at the owner's expense. 
(Prior Code, § 32.11; Ord. No. 2005-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-28. - Dwellings. 
All single-family dwellings on said property will have their own water line and meter. It will be unlawful to tap on to an existing meter. 
(Prior Code, § 32.12) 
Sec. 42-29. - Special fire protection services. 
(a)  Class of services provided. There are three main types of protection service available for use unmetered, within the property of commercial and industrial enterprises: 
(1)  Standpipe service. This consists of a pipeline with hose connections smaller than standard 2½-inch fire hose used by the city. All hose valves shall be closed and sealed and opened only in case of fire. 
(2)  Fire hydrants. Hydrants shall have a three-foot bury, unless otherwise specified with 30—36 inches above grade, shall be cast iron, bronze mounted with 4¼-inch minimum valve opening and 6½-inch minimum internal diameter with mechanical joint end connections. Hydrants shall be three-way with two 2½-inch hose connections and 4½-inch steamer connection, threads on hose connections and operating nut shall be furnished according to owner's standards. 
(3)  Automatic sprinkler service. This consists of automatic equipment as specified by the insurance companies. Water supplied for this purpose may be direct or to a water tank as required. 
(b)  Requirements. The customer desiring such service shall make application to the meter department in writing stating the size connection desired. All connections of such nature from existing mains to the customer's property line shall be done by the city and the customer shall bear the entire cost. There will be no monthly standby charge for special fire protection service but nothing herein shall be construed as the permission or right to use such unmetered water for any purpose except in case of conflagration. 
(c)  Inspection; violation. It shall be the duty of the fire department to regularly inspect all such installations and to report to the water department any violations of usage. Any customer in violation of this section shall be billed for unmetered water service in the amount of $125.00 for each violation. 
(Prior Code, § 32.13) 
Sec. 42-30. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city and county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 11-2, § 1, 1-17-2011) 
Sec. 42-31. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in article. 
(b)  The city's police department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Penalties for violation. Any violation of section 42-30 may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the Milner Municipal Court, and violators shall be punished as provided in section 1-7 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-2, § 1, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 42-32. - Tampering with city's water system prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  Generally. All water system facilities shall be considered the property of the City of Milner. Any person, firm, corporation, company, joint venture, public body, public agency, public authority, or other entity who, without the prior authorization of the city: 
(1)  Connects onto a city water line; 
(2)  Disconnects a water line from a city water line; 
(3)  Connects onto a city water meter; 
(4)  Disconnects a city water meter; 
(5)  Moves, removes, changes, or alters the location of a water meter; 
(6)  Changes, alters, or damages any water meter or water line so as to prevent proper registration of water passing through said water meter or line; 
(7)  Obtains, acquires, or uses water; 
(8)  Prevents any other person from obtaining water; 
(9)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with the reading or maintenance of any water meter; 
(10)  Obstructs or otherwise interferes with any water line, fire hydrant, pumping station or any appurtenances to the city's water system; or 
(11)  Creates a hazardous or unsafe condition to the city's water system; 
shall be issued a citation and, if found guilty, shall be punished as provided in subsection (b). 
For the purpose of this section, the term "water system" shall be interpreted, where applicable, to include the city's sewer system. 
(b)  Citations. Any person, firm, corporation, company, joint venture, public body, public agency, public authority, or other entity who is charged with having violated this section shall be issued a citation by the Milner Police Department. Said citation shall require the appearance of the violator in the Municipal Court of the City of Milner, to answer said charges. Violators of this section shall, upon conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, be punished as provided in section 1-7 of the City Code. 
Secs. 42-33—42-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 42-47. - Extension of water service to conform to this article. 
Water service shall not be extended to developed or undeveloped property either within the city or outside the city except in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 32.15) 
Sec. 42-48. - Water lines to be placed in public rights-of-way or public easements. 
Water lines shall only be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way lines of streets and roads which have been certified as being a part of the public road or street system of either the city or of the county. 
(Prior Code, § 32.16) 
Sec. 42-49. - Streets must be at final grade. 
A water line shall not be placed within a street right-of-way until the street for which such right-of-way was created has been constructed to final grade. 
(Prior Code, § 32.17) 
Sec. 42-50. - City not responsible for the creation of potential health and sanitation problems. 
When the lots requesting water service have been laid out in such a manner as might cause health and sanitation problems to develop when such lots are developed, the city water service shall only be extended to such lots after the owner of such lots has first devised a method of eliminating the danger of health and sanitation problems which shall meet with the approval of the county health department. 
(Prior Code, § 32.18) 
Sec. 42-51. - Size of lines to be installed. 
The size of the water lines to be installed to provide water service shall be determined by the city or its engineers and such determination shall be based on the following factors, among others: 
(1)  The maximum length of the line that will be installed. 
(2)  Possible future extensions of a proposed line. 
(3)  Reasonable estimates of the maximum demands for water service that will be placed on a line. 
(4)  The present or future part the line in question will play in a fire protection program. 
(Prior Code, § 32.19) 
Sec. 42-52. - Water lines to be installed by city. 
All water lines which are to be made a part of the city water distribution system shall be installed under the supervision of the city. Such lines shall be installed in accordance with such specifications as the city shall require and such lines when installed shall be the property of the city. 
(Prior Code, § 32.20) 
Sec. 42-53. - Cost of extending water service. 
(a)  The developer of subdivisions shall bear the full cost of water extensions, except any required water extensions from existing facilities to the property line of the subdivision shall be installed by the city and all material costs shall be paid by the developer when such extensions are approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The cost of all material used shall be paid to the clerk and treasurer before construction commences. 
(c)  The developer shall submit to the city a preliminary plat showing the layout, topographic map when required, street profiles, and any available information pertinent to the designing of utilities for a subdivision. 
(Prior Code, § 32.21) 
Sec. 42-54. - Mayor and council to approve all projects. 
Before an extension, renewal, or maintenance project shall be undertaken, the mayor and council shall be required to authorize the project. 
(Prior Code, § 32.22) 
Sec. 42-55. - Water meters. 
Any person who desires to connect to the city's water system, or any current customer of the city who replaces an existing water meter or installs a new water meter, must use a water meter of a make, model, and design approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-2, § 1, 9-8-2010) 
Secs. 42-56—42-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-82. - Sewage discharge prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet, creek, stream or body of water within the city, or into any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.1), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-83. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Human excrement means the bowel and kidney discharges of humans. 
Public sewer means the sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the city or to be owned and operated by the city upon installation. 
Septic tank means an underground cavity with watertight walls into which flows the effluent of sanitary water closets and from which the effluent does not come to the surface of the ground. A septic tank shall be built in strict compliance with the plans and specifications set forth in the Georgia Department of Public Health Engineering Bulletin No. 3 or any subsequent revision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.2), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-84. - Required connection to public sewer. 
(a)  Every residence, place of business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or are employed shall be connected to the public sewer. Until such time as the public sewer is operational, it shall be unlawful to maintain or use any residence, place of business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or are employed which is not provided with means for the disposal of human excrement and waste by a flush toilet connected to the public sewer or a septic tank. 
(b)  The obligation to connect every residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed to the public sewer shall commence the date on which such system is deemed operational. From the date on which such system is operational, the owner of each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed shall have 90 days to connect to such system without being in violation of this section. 
(c)  Separate plumbing fixtures shall be required for each building or place. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.3), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-85. - Tap fees for connection to public sewer. 
(a)  The owner of each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed within the city shall pay fees for connection to the public sewer as provided in subsection 18-42(c). 
(b)  The owner of each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed within the city shall have his sewer connection extended to the property line at a point designated by the city and pursuant to specifications and criteria established by the city at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.4), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-86. - Permit for septic tank required. 
Until such time as the public sewer is operational, each residence, place of business or other building where persons reside, congregate or are employed within the city shall be served by a septic tank. A permit for the construction or installation of each septic tank located within the city shall be obtained from the city clerk after approval thereof by the county environmental health department. After construction and installation are complete, an inspection must be obtained and approval granted by the county environmental health department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.5), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-87. - New construction. 
In cases of new construction, sewer taps shall be installed immediately. Contractors may install their own lines at no charge. The sewer line will be city property after one year. All installation and equipment must be approved by the city during all phases of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.7), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-88. - Schedule of rates. 
(a)  Rates for the public sewer service provided within the corporate limits of the city and to all industrial customers, whether inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, are as provided in subsection 18-42(d)(1). 
(b)  Bills are payable at the city hall by the tenth of the month or a penalty of ten percent will be added. If payment is not made by the 15th of the month, service will be continued, but a penalty of $50.00 will be charged, with termination of service pending. If service is terminated, a reconnection fee as provided in subsection 18-42(d)(2) will be imposed. Payment must be recorded at the city hall before service is restored. Service will be restored on the day of payment. In the event of a holiday or weekend, service will not be terminated until the following workday. 
(c)  Failure to receive a bill does not exempt penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.8), 2-15-2005) 
Secs. 42-89—42-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 42-120. - Extension of sewer service to conform to this article. 
Public sewer service shall not be extended to developed or undeveloped property either within or outside the city except in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.9), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-121. - Public sewer lines to be placed in public rights-of-way or public easements. 
Sewer lines shall only be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way lines of streets and roads which have been certified as being a part of the public road or street system of either the city or of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.10), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-122. - Streets must be at final grade. 
A public sewer line shall not be placed within a street right-of-way until the street for which such right-of-way was created has been constructed to final grade. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.11), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-123. - City not responsible for the creation of potential health and sanitation problems. 
When the lots requesting public sewer service have been laid out in such a manner as might cause health and sanitation problems to develop when such lots are developed, the city public sewer service shall only be extended to such lots after the owner of such lots has first devised a method of eliminating the danger of health and sanitation problems which shall meet with the approval of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.12), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-124. - Public sewer lines to be installed by city. 
All public sewer lines which are to be made a part of the city public sewer distribution system shall be installed under the supervision of the city. Such lines shall be installed in accordance with such specifications as the city shall require and such lines when installed shall be the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.13), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-125. - Cost of extending public sewer service. 
(a)  The developer of subdivisions shall bear the full cost of public sewer extensions, except any required extensions from existing facilities to the property line of the subdivision shall be installed by the city and all material costs shall be paid by the developer when such extensions are approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The cost of all material used shall be paid to the clerk and treasurer before construction commences. 
(c)  The developer shall submit to the city a preliminary plan showing layout, topographic map when required, street profiles, and any available information pertinent to the designing of utilities for a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.14), 2-15-2005) 
Sec. 42-126. - Mayor and council to approve all projects. 
Before an extension, renewal, or maintenance project shall be undertaken, the mayor and council shall be required to authorize the project. 
(Ord. No. 2005-3, § 2(34.15), 2-15-2005) 
Secs. 42-127—42-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - THEFT IDENTITY PROTECTION FOR UTILITY ACCOUNTS 

Sec. 42-200. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-202. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Milner. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, covered account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes covered companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and driver's license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-203. - Findings. 
(a)  The city may be a creditor pursuant to 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer utilities. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes which provide an opportunity for identity theft to occur. 
(d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information obtained by such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)  The city determines that there is some risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-204. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  To open any covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide personal identifying information in the form of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-205. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) may be changed by on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city administrator and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city administrator and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-206. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-207. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft. Such red flags may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers, including, but not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number ("SSN") has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which would be generally available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. For example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-208. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city administrator in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city administrator: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 72 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city administrator. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city administrator, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Sec. 42-209. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 1-21-2009) 
Secs. 42-210—42-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRIC UTILITY FRANCHISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-1, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2011, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. IV, §§ 42-131—42-133. Inasmuch as there was already provisions so designated as Art. IV, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. V, §§ 42-220—42-222, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 42-220. - Grant of right to electric supplier. 
The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to each electric supplier within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq., their successors, lessees, and assigns, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this article, for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city, within the present and future limits of the city as from time to time each such company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for public or private use, and to reenter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as each such company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of each such company, to ensure safe and efficient service. The foregoing notwithstanding, this article shall not include any entity with whom the city has, or may in the future have, a written franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, § 2(42-131), 1-17-2011) 
Sec. 42-221. - Franchise fees authorized. 
The future use by any electric utility company of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of any of its electric distribution systems, and the grant of the requisite street franchise rights is expressly conditioned upon payment by that company of franchise fees pursuant to this article; and continued use and occupancy of such city property for that purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful. The city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, § 2(42-132), 1-17-2011) 
Sec. 42-222. - Terms and conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents contained in this article are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Each electric utility company shall pay monthly to the city a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of such company's customers served within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding month. However, an electric utility company may elect to make one annual payment to the city in lieu of 12 monthly payments with the prior approval of the city. 
(2)  The percentage of gross revenues shall be in lieu of all other license or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of the company in the same manner as all other property, real or personal, in the city is taxed. 
(3)  If the city shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this article, including the payment provisions of this article. 
(4)  Each company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless (including payment of the city's reasonable attorney's fees and court costs) the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires, or other apparatus, by such company, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting from such activity, for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
(5)  Each company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires, and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power of the city. 
(6)  a.  The grant of rights, permission and consents by the city contained in this article to any company is specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city from such company in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in subsection (1) of this section; and failure by any company to timely pay the franchise fees shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted to such company by this article. 
b.  Each electric utility company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys, and public places of the city for the purposes stated in this article shall evidence that company's acceptance of the franchise granted by this article and shall render that company liable for payment of all fees required by subsection (1) of this section. In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the forfeiting company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. 
(7)  The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article and shall have the power to prepare and provide for the collection of the fees required in this article. 
(8)  All work done by any company upon the streets, alleys and public places by the city shall be done under the supervision of the mayor and council; and any sidewalk, street pavement or other city improvement which may be displaced, obstructed or destroyed by reason of such work shall be properly replaced, reopened or repaired by such company to the satisfaction of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, § 2(42-133), 1-17-2011) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of provisions of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
Chapter 102 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-3, § 1, adopted February 25, 2008, repealed § 102-2, which pertained to fee provisions. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 102-1. - Planning commission established. 
There is hereby created a planning commission to consist of five members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the councilmembers for terms of one year each and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The planning commission shall be advisory to the mayor and council. 
Secs. 102-2—102-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPENING AND CLOSING STREETS 

Sec. 102-23. - Petition of property owners. 
The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to declare open or closed public streets and alleyways, or parts thereof, within the corporate limits of the city. Such action shall be initiated by petition of all abutting property owners of the portion of the street or alleyway to be opened or closed, with recommendation exhibited signed by five other taxpayers of the city, and same shall be brought to the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 25-1) 
Sec. 102-24. - Consideration of petition. 
At the first regular meeting thereafter of the mayor and council, the petition shall be read and tabled for action at the next regular meeting, at which time evidence shall be heard, if presented, and the determination of the mayor and council of said city made at such time and spread upon the minutes of the meetings of the mayor and council. 
(Prior Code, § 25-2) 
Sec. 102-25. - Reversion of titles to land. 
The title to streets or alleyways together with rights-of-way closed by such action shall revert according to existing laws. 
(Prior Code, § 25-4) 
Chapter 106 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Permit and inspection fees. 
The fees to be paid to the city for permits and inspections required by the state construction codes shall be as established by the city. 
Secs. 106-2—106-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADOPTION OF STATE CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-11 adopted November 21, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as section 24-1. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included herein as section 106-11. 

Sec. 106-11. - Adoption of state building, construction and other codes. 
(a)  The City of Milner adopts the following minimum standard codes: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC); 
(9)  International Existing Building Code (ICC); 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC). 
(b)  The codes adopted in section 106-11 (a) shall mean such codes identified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23(B)(i) as they exist as of September 1, 2007, or subsequent amendments to such codes as may be adopted by the State of Georgia after such date. 
(Ord. No. 2007-11, § 2, 11-21-07) 
Secs. 106-12—106-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, adopted November 21, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as § 20-8. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 106-16. 

Sec. 106-16. - Unsafe housing abatement. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the definitions of terms set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are adopted by the City of Milner, as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  Duty of owner. It shall be the duty of the owner of each dwelling, building structure or property located within the City of Milner to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with any and all applicable codes adopted by the State of Georgia, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9) (A) (i) and any code adopted by the City of Milner as set forth in this Code, section 106-11. 
(c)  Public officer. The city administrator of the City of Milner, Georgia or his designee shall be authorized to exercise the powers set forth in this section. 
(d)  Request for investigation. When a request is filed by a public authority or at least five residents of the city charging or alleging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and/or is not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes or otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the city administrator or his designee shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building or structure. 
(e)  Result of investigation or inspection. If the investigation or inspection conducted by or caused to be conducted by the city administrator pursuant to subsection (d) above identified that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the city administrator or his designee may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building or structure. 
(f)  Contents of complaint. The complaint initiated by the city administrator or his designee shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties, state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the city administrator or his designee to abate the alleged nuisance or condition. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5 at a date and time certain and at a place within the City of Milner, Georgia or Lamar County. The summons shall be served on interested parties as required by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of the complaint with the proper court. Any interested party shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(g)  Judicial determination; contents of order. If, after notice and hearing required by subsection (f), the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the dwelling, building or structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  In making its determination of the "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure," the court shall not consider the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a dwelling, building or structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be considered. The present value of the dwelling, building or structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvements may be established by affidavit of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43, qualified building contractors or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony being presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations. 
(h)  Owner's failure to comply with order. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the city administrator or his designee may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated, closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of the time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The city administrator or his designee shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling, building or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(i)  Credit for demolition materials. If the city administrator or his designee cause the structure to be demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sale proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The city administrator or his designee and the governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(j)  Lien for cost of demolition. The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(k)  Attachment of lien. The lien provided for in subsection (j) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in this Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Lamar County, Georgia and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Lamar County and shall enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior and shall continue in force until paid. 
(l)  Statement of costs and fees. Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this section, the city administrator or his designee shall transmit to the city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the city administrator or his designee shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the city revenue officer to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The Lamar County Tax Commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this section in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The Lamar County Tax Commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the City of Milner, Georgia. 
(m)  Enforcement/redemption of lien. The lien authorized by this section may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(3). The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding authorized by this section shall be pursuant to § 41-2-9(4). 
(Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, 11-21-07) 
Sec. 106-17. - Display of street address numbers. 
(a)  Existing structures and locations. Every existing house, mobile home, apartment, commercial structure, location or other building or structure having a street address number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the City of Milner is encouraged to display such house number in a manner readily legible and visible by emergency personnel from the adjacent road or street. Signs are available on a voluntary basis from the Lamar County Fire Department for a fee. 
(b)  New structures and remodeling/renovation of existing structures. Every new or remodeled/renovated house, mobile home, apartment, commercial structure, location or other building or structure that requires obtaining a building permit under Section 118-35 of the Milner City Code, or other applicable code section, after the adoption of this section and having a street address number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the City of Milner, shall, in addition to any other permitting fees, be assessed a fee in an amount set from time to time by the City sufficient to cover the purchase and installation of a display sign for such address number in a manner readily legible and visible to emergency personnel from the adjacent road or street. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 8-20-2018) 
Chapter 110 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, adopted June 11, 2014, repealed Ch. 110 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 110 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 110, Arts. I—III, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Sign Ord. §§ 201, 202, 401—407, 410, 412, 413, 501—514, 602, 606. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the chapter are set out in the preamble hereto and as follows herein. 
(1)  A comprehensive regulation of signs is necessary because of the current burgeoning growth throughout Lamar County and within and adjacent to the City of Milner and this growth attracts signs that are unrelated to business uses inside the city, leading to poor aesthetics and dropping property values. 
(2)  To ensure that the city remains an attractive residential area as well as a viable commercial area, it is necessary to maintain a visually satisfying environment. A plethora of signs of a certain size and nature, no matter how tasteful, can have an undesirable effect upon traffic safety and the well-being of the entire community. The city is more likely to attract commercial enterprises and permanent residents if it improves and maintains the city's appearance. City residents will ultimately benefit from enhanced retail and commercial environments and improvements in the quality of life as a result of these regulations. It is a rational desire of the community, and most specifically of those who live therein from day to day, to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
(3)  Further, the city has an obligation and a right to protect the rights of adjoining landowners, to adequate light and air, to promote desirable living conditions and sustain stability of neighborhoods, to protect property against blight and deprivation, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land, buildings and other structures throughout the city. 
(4)  Accordingly, in consideration of the city's rights and obligations to promote traffic safety, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public travel, to eliminate annoyance to travelers, to attract tourists, residents and industry, to serve the public health, safety and morals, to advance the general prosperity of the community, and to serve the general welfare, the city council hereby imposes the regulations contained in this article. 
(5)  The city council finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals and entities may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as well as a traffic hazard. Such signs may also constitute an aesthetic nuisance and be a detriment to property values and the city's public welfare. By enacting this section, the city council intends to: 
a.  Balance the rights of individuals and entities to convey their message through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
b.  Protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the city; 
c.  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
d.  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
e.  Protect property values by minimizing the potentially adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
f.  Promote economic development; and 
g.  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined here have the same meaning as found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context. The terms "must," "will" and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "person" includes a "firm," "corporation," "co-partnership," "association," "institution" or "person." The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, includes the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed," "to be used" or "to be occupied." 
Administrative officer means that person designated by the city council to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Advertising device means any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising situated upon or attached to real property. 
Banner means a sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations, applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing, the same being characteristically hung or displayed on buildings or suspended in midair across streets, passageways, or other areas visible to the general public. 
Billboard means an outdoor, off-site sign. 
Building means any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Changeable copy means any sign constructed with letters or characters whereby changes can be made of advertising price, special events, business hours, etc. 
Developer means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same under this chapter. 
Frontage, building, means the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Frontage, road, means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Marquee means a roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
Planned development means a group of retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries, or any other businesses planned to serve the public, which is in common ownership or condominium ownership. 
Sign means any name, identification, graphic, description, illustration, or device including the brace or amounts of other means used to erect and stabilize the same, which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land in view of the public which directs attention to a product, place, activity, service, person, business, or institution. 
Sign, animated, means any sign with action, motion, changing colors, or moving characteristics which requires electrical or mechanical energy, including wind-actuated elements such as flags, spinners, banners, and aerial devices. 
Sign area means and is computed as the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. The supports, uprights, or structure on which any sign is supported must be included in determining the sign area whenever such supports are designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the display. The sign area of painted or affixed wall signs when composed of letters only is the sum of the area of a rectangle which enclosed all the letters. Only one face of a double-faced sign with parallel, opposing faces 15 inches or less apart and bearing identical copy must be used in computing the area. 
Sign, awning or canopy, means a sign imposed or painted upon any roof-like structure which provides either permanent or temporary shelter for adjacent walkways or entrances to a building or property. 
Sign, bench, means any sign attached to or painted upon a bench or other seat placed in the public view and meant to be for public use or viewing. 
Sign, business, means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Sign, community event, means a sign announcing a community event sponsored by the city, a school, church, or other nonprofit charitable or service organization including directional sign to such an event. 
Sign, construction, means a temporary sign erected and maintained on premises during construction to identify a construction project for which a building permit has been issued. 
Sign, digital, means any sign erected outdoors which electronically or mechanically displays the time, date, temperature, population or other date in addition to a business advertisement. 
Sign, directly lighted, means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Sign, directory, arcade, and mall, mean a serial sign which identifies the names of businesses, offices, professionals, industries, or other entities located within a planned center. 
Sign, double-faced, means a sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display area is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Sign face means the part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Sign, flashing, means a sign, the lighting of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effect. Illuminated signs which indicate only the time, temperature, or date must not be considered as flashing signs. 
Sign, freestanding, means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
Sign, fuel pricing, means any sign advertising current prices for, but not limited to, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, etc. 
Sign, ground, means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Sign height means the distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
Sign, indirectly lighted, means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Sign, marquee, means a business sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. 
Sign, nonconforming, means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Sign, off-site, means any sign or graphic not located on the premises of the business or entity indicated, advertised, or identified by said sign or any sign which advertises or calls attention to any activity, product, event, service, business, or institution where the same are not conducted, furnished, sold, or offered on the premises where such sign is located. 
Sign, political, means a sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party, or candidate for public office. 
Sign, portable, means any sign which is not permanently affixed, including, but not limited to, signs mounted on vehicles parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of an advertising device. 
Sign, projecting or swinging, means a sign projecting more than 12 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building or supports upon which it is located. 
Sign, real estate, means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease, or for sale. 
Sign, real estate directional, means a sign which conveys directions to a specific property being offered for sale, rent, lease or development. 
Sign, roof, means any sign or graphic erected or maintained on a building, any portion of which extends above the lowest horizontal line of any roof. 
Sign, sidewalk or sandwich, means a movable sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located or to another permanent structure, and which is designed to be mobile or is designed to remain in place for a limited time. 
Sign, temporary, means a sign of a nonpermanent nature. All such signs must be removed within ten days after the purpose for which the sign was intended to advertise has been accomplished. 
Sign, trailer, means any sign which is mounted on any trailer or truck and may be moved from one location to another by means of being towed by a vehicle. 
Sign, wall, means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 12 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure must constitute one wall sign. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-3. - Penalty. 
The owner or tenant of any sign, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agents, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-4. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No sign is to be erected, used, moved, or altered in a manner that does not conform to the requirements specified in this chapter. 
(b)  The only exception to this requirement is that all signs which lawfully existed at a particular location at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted may be continued as nonconforming signs. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-5. - Powers and duties of the administrative officer. 
The administrative officer has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
(1)  Provide initial information about this chapter upon request. 
(2)  Advise how to contact members of the mayor and council or other officials as may be appropriate for services provided by those officials. 
(3)  Offer practical suggestions on how to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  Maintain complete records concerning this chapter and related matters, and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(5)  Propose amendments to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-6. - Powers and duties of the mayor and council. 
The mayor and council have the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
(1)  Accept applications for amendment of this chapter and render official decisions on them for review and recommendations as specified in section 110-37. 
(2)  Propose amendments to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Secs. 110-7—110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES AND APPROVALS 

Sec. 110-31. - Initial information. 
The administrative officer will show the developer a copy of this chapter. The developer may either review the document in the office or he may purchase a copy for his own use. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-32. - Nonconforming signs. 
Invariably, at the time this chapter is adopted or amended, certain signs, which lawfully existed prior to the adoption or amendment, will not conform to specified regulations and development. These are known as nonconforming signs, and in order to feasibly adopt this chapter and so as not to cause undue economic hardship on owners of nonconforming signs, these signs are allowed to continue under the following special conditions: 
(1)  Where a nonconforming sign has ceased to be used for more than six months or has been changed to a permanent or conforming sign, further use of the sign must be in conformance with the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign must not be extended or altered unless the extension or alteration is in conformance with the requirements of the chapter. 
(3)  A nonconforming sign which is altered or extended must meet applicable city building codes and development regulations. When an applicant seeks a sign permit for the extension or alteration of a nonconforming sign, the administrative officer will inspect the sign and determine what (if anything) is needed to bring the sign into conformance with applicable building codes and development regulations. Upon determining that the sign meets applicable building codes and development regulations, he will issue the sign permit for the nonconforming sign. 
(4)  If a nonconforming sign suffers damage which does not exceed 50 percent of its assessed valuation, the sign may be reconstructed and reused as before if done within 12 months from the time such damage occurred. If such damage is greater than 50 percent of its assessed valuation, such a sign may only be reconstructed and used in conformity with the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-33. - Permit required. 
(a)  All signs allowed by this chapter, except for those signs exempted from obtaining a permit, shall require a permit issued by the city prior to posting, displaying, substantially changing, enlarging, moving, or erecting a sign in the city. 
(b)  No public utility hookup will be made available to the site of a proposed sign until a sign permit is secured. 
(c)  The sign permit must be applied for either by the owner of the land upon which the proposed sign or alteration is to be located, or by the contractor doing the work. 
(d)  The applicant may obtain a sign permit application from the administrative officer. He should submit the following information to the administrative officer in application for a sign permit: 
(1)  Completed application form. 
(2)  Plans and drawings showing the area of the sign, size of supports, height, method of attachment intended for use, vertical and horizontal distances between the sign and controlling right-of-way lines. 
(3)  A photograph or line drawing of the sign, depicting precisely what is to be portrayed on the sign. 
(4)  Any other documentation which the administrative officer may specify. 
(e)  No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for a sign permit is, at the time of such an application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  He must be tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of the charges and present a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(f)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (e)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for the sign permit. 
(g)  An existing sign which is altered or extended must meet applicable city building codes and development regulations. When an applicant seeks a sign permit for the extension or alteration of an existing sign, the administrative officer will inspect the sign and determine what (if anything) is needed to bring the sign into conformance with applicable building codes and development regulations before a sign permit may be issued. 
(h)  The administrative officer is in charge of issuing sign permits. The administrative officer will contact the applicant at the address shown on the application. The sign permit will be issued if, upon review of the application and inspection of the site, the administrative officer is satisfied that the proposed sign will meet the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances. The administrative officer may require the submission of additional materials if he feels additional information is needed in order to determine if the proposed sign meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  If the administrative officer feels that the proposed sign as presented in the sign permit application will not satisfy the requirements of this chapter, he will not issue a sign permit. He will notify the applicant in writing within ten days of the submission of the application, stating reasons for the refusal. The applicant will then need to confer with the administrative officer to determine what he needs to do in order to comply with this chapter and be eligible for a sign permit. 
(j)  Construction on an approved sign must start within six months from the date of issue of the sign permit, or the permit will become invalid and a new one must be applied for if construction of the sign is desired at a future date. If construction is begun on an approved sign and then ceases before the sign is completed, construction must be restarted within six months from the time it was stopped or the permit will become invalid and a new one must be applied for if construction of the sign is desired to resume at a future date. Records of sign permit applications and supporting materials will be maintained by the administrative officer. 
(k)  All newly constructed signs, as well as additions, alterations, extensions, or enlargements of signs, must comply with all building codes in effect in the city. The administrative officer will explain the procedures and timing of inspections to determine if work meets applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-34. - Certificate of final sign approval required; issuance subject to compliance. 
(a)  A certificate of final sign approval is required before a sign for which a sign permit has been issued may be used or maintained. The sign permit becomes the certificate of final sign approval when the administrative officer signs it in the appropriate space, certifying that to the best of his knowledge all requirements of this chapter have been met. The owner/contractor will then receive the certificate of final approval to be used as confirmation that he has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The administrative officer will issue the certificate of final sign approval within ten days of receiving notification from the applicant that construction of the sign has been completed if he finds that all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances have been met. However, if he finds that all requirements of such ordinances and this chapter have not yet been met when the owner/contractor seeks a certificate of final sign approval, the administrative officer will not issue the certificate of final approval. He will notify the owner/contractor within ten days, stating the reasons for the refusal. The owner/contractor will then need to confer with the administrative officer to determine what he needs to do in order to comply with the chapter and be eligible for a certificate of final approval. After the sign is constructed and in place, the applicant must notify the administrative officer within two working days that the sign is ready for final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-35. - Appealing an action of the administrative officer. 
(a)  If the administrative officer executes an action which the developer or other aggrieved party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed. Finding of fact, however, may not be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action by the administrative officer was taken. 
(b)  The mayor and council have jurisdiction for hearing appeals concerning actions taken of the administrative officer related to this chapter. Applications for appeal may be obtained from and submitted to the administrative officer, who will transmit them to mayor and council for their consideration. 
(c)  When an action of the administrative officer is appealed, all construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action must be stopped immediately. In certain cases, however, the administrative officer may feel that the stopping of such construction or other activity authorized by the appeal action will cause imminent peril to life or property. Then the administrative officer may certify to the mayor and council that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the halting of construction or other activity authorized by the appeal action would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, the construction or other activity authorized by the appeal action is allowed to continue unless a restraining order is granted by either the mayor and council or a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(d)  When an application for appeal of an action of the administrative officer is received, the mayor and council will set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the parties to the appeal will be notified of the date of the hearing by the mayor and council by U.S. mail at least 15 days before the hearing. Any person may appear at the hearing, or have a representative attend instead. 
(e)  The mayor and council will make a decision concerning the appeal and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. Further appeal on points of law may be made to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-36. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance is a permit, issued by the mayor and council, which allows use of a sign in a way that does not meet certain requirements of this chapter. A variance may be granted only in an individual case where extreme hardship would result if all the requirements of this chapter were applied stringently to a particular sign. The hardship must be proven by showing beyond a doubt that reasonable use of this sign is not possible if all of the requirements of this chapter are to be met. The hardship cannot be self created such as: 
(1)  A sign purchased with knowledge of an existing restriction. 
(2)  A claim of hardship in terms of prospective sales of this sign. 
(3)  An expressed economic need requiring a variance, when such a need can be met in other ways which would not require a variance. 
(b)  Relief from the hardship, the variance, must not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  When a variance is issued, the spirit of this chapter must be observed and the public safety and welfare secured. A variance may be granted only for permitted signs in the zoning district in which the sign or proposed sign in question is located. (For example, a type of sign which is not permitted in an R-1 zoning district would not be allowed to be placed in an R-1 district under a variance.) 
(d)  The developer or owner wishing to request a variance must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject sign or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing under the owner's signature. The administrative officer may also propose a variance; however, the power to approve a variance rests with the mayor and council. 
(e)  Application for a variance may be made with the administrative officer. The administrative officer will take the required information and transmit it to the mayor and council for their consideration. No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for a variance or any other action by the mayor and council is, at the time of such an application determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased to be in violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  He must be tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of charges and present a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(f)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (e)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for variance or other action by the mayor and council and submit it to the mayor and council in the manner prescribed. 
(g)  When an application for a variance is received, the mayor and council will set a time and place for a public hearing on the variance. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. Such a notice will state the application number, owner's name, sign location, its area, time, place, and subject of the hearing. At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, a notice of the time, place, and subject of the hearing will be sent to the applicant or petitioner in writing by U.S. mail to his last known address. Copies of all such letters will be maintained in the applicant's file for a permanent record. 
(h)  The mayor and council will make a decision concerning the variance and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. 
(i)  The variance issued by the mayor and council must specify which requirements are to be varied from. It must specify alternative requirements to be met, replacing the requirements varied from. 
(j)  The mayor and council may establish performance bonds to assure compliance with any requirements it has set for granting a variance. Where a variance is granted for a construction activity requiring a sign permit, the sign permit must be obtained and construction begun within six months of the issuance of the variance. Otherwise, the variance expires after six months. 
(k)  The decision of the mayor and council on the application for variance may be appealed on points of law to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-37. - Amendments. 
(a)  If a developer or sign owner finds that a proposed new sign does not meet the requirements of this chapter, he may request that this chapter be amended to permit his proposed sign. The developer or owner wishing to request an amendment to the official map must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing under the owner's signature. The administrative officer may also propose an amendment. However, the power to approve and enact an amendment rest with the mayor and council. 
(b)  Application for an amendment may be made with the administrative officer. The administrative officer will take the required information and transmit it to the mayor and council for their consideration. No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for an amendment or any other action by the mayor and council is, at the time of such an application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased to be in violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  He must be tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of charges and present a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(c)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for amendment or other action by the mayor and council and submit it to the mayor and council in the manner prescribed. 
(d)  All applications for amendment must first be reviewed by the mayor and council. The mayor and council will study the proposed amendment and determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, as well as other applicable ordinances of the city. At this time, the administrative officer may review the proposed amendment and make written recommendations to the mayor and council. 
(e)  The mayor and council must then conduct a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing contents of notice set forth. 
(f)  The following policies and procedures will be observed in conducting the required public hearing: 
(1)  The hearing will be held in city hall. 
(2)  Written comments on the subject of the hearing may be submitted by any citizen or property owner at any time prior to the adjournment of the hearing. 
(3)  Persons desiring to be heard orally may present their views at the hearing. The length of time of oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be governed by the mayor and council, depending upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak. Personal remarks will not be permitted. 
(4)  Any person desiring a transcript of the hearing must arrange for a court reporter at his own expense. 
(5)  Cross-examination of persons making oral presentations will not be permitted. 
(6)  All questions will be addressed to the mayor and councilmember presiding. 
(7)  Standing to challenge an amendment decision is not conferred by being permitted to speak orally at a hearing, nor being permitted to file statements or pleadings. 
(g)  The mayor and council will make a written record of the comments received at the public hearing. After the public hearing, and at an official meeting of the mayor and council, the mayor and council will formulate their recommendations, recording them in the minutes for that meeting. 
(h)  If the mayor and council deny a proposed amendment, a minimum period of 12 months must pass before the same amendment proposal is again submitted for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-38. - Appealing an action of the mayor and council. 
If the mayor and council execute an action which the developer or other aggrieved party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the county superior court. Finding of fact, however, may not be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the mayor and council was taken. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Secs. 110-39—110-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 110-65. - Signs allowed only by special permit. 
The following types of signs or advertising devices are permitted only by issue of a special permit allowing the use of this type of advertising for a period of no more than 15 consecutive days. No such special permit may be issued for the same premises at less than six-month intervals. A fee as set by the mayor and council will be charged for each such special permit of: 
(1)  Air- or gas-filled devices. 
(2)  Balloons or streamers. 
(3)  Flags or banners except official flags of the United States, the state, local government, or other public service agencies. 
(4)  Searchlights and similar devices. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-66. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs or advertising devices are prohibited within the city limits: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Sidewalk, sandwich, or curb-type signs which encroach or overhang over public sidewalks, alleys, or rights-of way. 
(3)  Portable signs. 
(4)  Swinging or projecting signs, unless approval is granted by the administrative officer. In no case, however, will this type of sign exceed six square feet in area. 
(5)  Rotating or animated signs involving motion or sound exceeding two square feet in area. 
(6)  Flashing, blinking, or varying light intensity signs, exceeding two square feet in area, other than during normal business hours up until 10:00 p.m. 
(7)  Signs on public right-of-way, except signs exempt under section 110-67. 
(8)  Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal or contain the words: stop, go, slow, caution, danger, warning, or similar words, except for construction signs and barricades, and except when the words are incorporated in the permanent name of a business. 
(9)  Courtesy benches, trash cans, and similar devices on which advertising is displayed. 
(10)  Trailer signs. 
(11)  Off-premises signs, except those in accordance with sections 110-6 and 110-70. 
(12)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene as defined by O.C.G.A § 16-12-80. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-67. - Signs exempted from permit requirements. 
The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 110-33 and shall not count towards any maximum aggregate sign area limits: 
(1)  Non-illuminated signs, having a sign area of less than 15 square feet, provided they are not located in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Window signs installed for purposes of viewing from outside the premises. However, such signs shall not exceed 30 percent of the available window spaces. 
(3)  Signs on residential premises indicating the name or address of the resident are allowed in all zones and are exempt from all provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of 30 days no more than twice a year. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-68. - Misleading advertising on signs. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to display false or misleading statements upon signs or other public places calculated to mislead the public as to anything sold, services to be performed, or information disseminated. The fact that any such sign or display contains words or language sufficient to mislead a reasonable or prudent person is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the persons displaying such a sign, or permitting such a sign to be displayed at their residence, establishment, or place of business. 
(b)  When a business or service using an identification or business sign is discontinued, all signs and sign structures relating to that business or service must be removed within ten days from the date of discontinuance. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-69. - Maintenance of signs. 
(a)  All signs must be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The administrative officer may cause to be removed after due notice, any sign which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or if the ground area around the sign is not well maintained. 
(b)  The administrative officer will give the owner ten days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the administrative officer will have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-70. - Lighting of signs. 
(a)  The light from any lighted sign must not be of an intensity or brightness which will interfere with the peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(b)  No sign may have blinking, flashing, or fluctuating lights or other lighting devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color except those depicting time, temperature, or date. 
(c)  No colored lights may be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(d)  Neither direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-71. - Political signs. 
Political signs must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must be no more than six square feet in area when located in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, P-R, P-M, or H zoning district; and no more than 32 square feet in area in other zoning districts. 
(2)  They must be removed within ten days after the final election including any runoff which the sign is intended to influence. 
(3)  They must be set back a minimum of ten feet from the pavement of any street. 
(4)  They are not permitted on any public right-of-way. 
(5)  They may not be attached to any street sign, any sign directing or controlling traffic, any pole or post supporting such signs, any utility pole or post, tree, shrub, or plant. 
(6)  For political signs exceeding six square feet in area, a permit from the administrative officer is required. 
(7)  Political signs may not exceed 20 feet in height. 
(8)  The city is empowered to remove or cause to be removed all political signs not conforming with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-72. - Bond, public liability insurance required. 
Anyone wishing to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city must obtain a city business license and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state showing the entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim and public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death to one person. The certificate of insurance must state that the insurance carrier will notify the city 30 days in advance of any termination and/or restriction of the coverage. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-73. - Ground signs. 
Ground signs are permitted in the P-M, P-R, 0-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2 and H zoning districts. They must meet the following standards: 
(1)  No ground sign may have a height greater than five feet above ground level. 
(2)  No ground sign may have an area greater than 35 square feet. 
(3)  No ground sign may be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way or within 50 feet of any other sign, structure, or building. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-74. - Freestanding signs. 
Freestanding signs are permitted in the P-M, 0-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, and H zoning districts. They must meet the following standards: 
(1)  Such a sign must have a height of less than ten feet above street level. 
(2)  Such a sign must have an area of no more than 50 square feet. 
(3)  Supports for such signs or the sign which supports it must not project within ten feet of any street right-of-way defined as the vertical line from the right-of-way upward. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-75. - Wall signs. 
Wall signs are permitted in the P-M, P-R, 0-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, and H zoning districts. They must meet the following standards: 
(1)  One square foot of sign space is permitted for each linear foot of distance from building frontage to the right-of-way on which the building fronts, except where building structure is located less than ten feet from street right-of-way, a maximum of 20 square feet is permitted. 
(2)  No wall sign is permitted which is greater than five percent of the wall upon which the sign is mounted. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-76. - Directory, arcade, and mall signs. 
Directory, arcade, and mall signs are permitted in the P-M, P-DR, 0-1, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. They are permitted in areas which a planned development has been approved by the mayor and council. Such signs must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must contain the name of the center to which they refer. 
(2)  They must be of an area no more than 60 square feet. 
(3)  Each tenant located in such a center is permitted an identification sign not to exceed eight square feet in area. 
(4)  A theater within a planned center may erect one sign not exceeding 50 square feet in sign area, which sign shall identify the theater and its current features; however, no theater sign is permitted within 50 feet of any other ground, freestanding, directory, arcade, or mall sign. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-77. - Additional required standards for signs in P-M, P-R, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2 zoning districts. 
The following standards must be adhered to for signs in the C-1, C-2, C-3, 0-1, M-1, M-2, and H zoning districts (in this section, the term "business" includes planned apartment home community and planned manufactured home community): 
(1)  Each business shall be permitted to utilize the following combination of wall and ground signs subject to the provisions hereinafter stated: 
a.  If the distance from the entrance of the business to the street right-of-way is 50 feet or less, said business may employ any combination of wall or ground signs with a total sign area of up to 50 square feet. 
b.  If the distance from the entrance to the business from the right-of-way is 50 feet or more but not greater than 100 feet, said business may employ any combination of wall and ground signs with a total of 75 square feet. 
c.  If the distance from the entrance to the business from the street right-of-way is greater than 100 feet, said business may employ any combination of wall and ground signs with a combined sign area of one square foot for each linear foot of distance from the right-of-way aforesaid. Provided further, no wall sign shall have a total sign area greater than five percent of wall area upon which it is mounted. Provided further, that subject to the same area restrictions, said business may employ as an alternative combination of freestanding and wall signs instead of a combination of wall and ground signs. 
d.  Businesses located in shopping centers shall be permitted one wall sign and one identification sign on a directory sign. 
(2)  Brand names and trademarks or a combination of brand name trademark shall constitute a sign. 
(3)  One fuel pricing sign per type of fuel sold shall be permitted with a maximum sign area of four square feet per fuel price, provided further the total combined area of signs shall be no greater than 18 square feet even though they are placed at different locations of the business. 
(4)  Signs with changeable copy shall be prohibited except on ground signs (except theater signs); provided further, changeable copy shall only be allowed on 30 percent of the area of the sign face. 
(5)  All signs with changeable copy, direct lighting, indirect lighting, and directory, arcade, and mall signs must have prior approval of the mayor and council before a construction permit is issued. 
(6)  Conforming signs which are relocated from a business site to a new business site without a change in copy shall conform to the provisions of this chapter; provided, further, signs which are relocated and on which copy change is required shall be considered a new sign and a permit shall be required. 
(7)  Directory, arcade, and mall signs shall apply to any combination of businesses which are three or more in number located within a planned center. In the event a structure or development is expanded or subleased to include businesses of three or more any existing signs not complying with the provisions of this chapter for planned centers, offices, commercial, or shopping centers shall become nonconforming. All multiple business structures with only one entrance including structures housing two businesses shall only be allowed one wall sign per business and one directory sign per business constructed. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 110-78. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs may be permitted for any zone. They must have a sign face area of no more than 35 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 14-2, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Chapter 114 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 114-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Terms not defined here have the same meaning as is found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context. The terms "must," "will," and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "developer" includes a firm, corporation, copartnership, association, institution, or person. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed," "to be used" or "to be occupied." 
Administrative officer means the person, officer, or official and his authorized representative, whom the mayor and council has designated as its agent for the administration of this chapter. 
As-built plans means detailed construction plans showing completed improvements as constructed. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public roads or streets, other than alleys. 
Buffer means that portion of a lot established for open space purposes and intended to separate properties with different and possibly incompatible types of uses. A buffer shall not be occupied with structures. A buffer shall remain undisturbed from its natural predevelopment vegetative state. Encroachment of a buffer, as needed for construction, may be authorized by obtaining written consent of the administrative officer. Where encroachment of a buffer is allowed, vegetation disturbance shall be kept to the minimum required for the installation and vegetation that is removed shall be replaced with suitable landscape material that provides the same quality of screening. A buffer may be incorporated into the yard setback as specified in the appropriate zoning district. Where any buffer encroaches upon the boundaries of any lot, the developer shall reserve such permanent easements as are necessary for reservation of the right to access all buffers for maintenance purposes. Where required by this chapter or as a condition of zoning or plat approval imposed by the city council, a buffer must include the installation of a suitable visual screen in accordance with the provisions contained in article IV of chapter 118 (Zoning). 
Building line means the line which represents the distance a building must be set back from the boundary line of a lot, measured at the foundation of the building. 
Building setback line means a line parallel to a specified minimum distance form the front, side, or rear property lines beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building projects with the exception of roof overhang, steps, and the subsurface projection of footings. 
Centerline, street, means that line surveyed and monumented by the city as the centerline of a street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it is the line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Construction plan means a plan, based on the approved preliminary plat, which shows all street design and profiles, topographic information, utility construction plans, sediment and erosion control plans, and other information which may be required by the administrative officer. It is submitted to the administrative officer and requires only his approval. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Curb cut means the point at which vehicular access is provided to an adjoining street from a lot. 
Design standards means the specifications to landowners or subdividers for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots. 
Developer means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same under this chapter. 
Development means the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or land disturbance of a commercial use or residential subdivision. 
Easement means the right or privilege of using another's property for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, and other purposes. 
Elevation, front, means the view of a building or group of buildings as seen from directly in front of the structure. 
Engineer means a professional engineer licensed in the state and registered through the state board of professional engineers who is competent in the field of civil design. 
Flood boundary means the area threatened by periodic flooding as determined by data and maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), U.S. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or hydrological studies utilizing generally accepted engineering practices. All lands within the limits of a flood having a 100-year return frequency or greater. The floodplain area consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe areas. 
Hearing means any regular or specially called meeting of the building and zoning department, the planning commission, or the mayor and council. 
Land use plan means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the mayor and council, as amended. 
Landscape architect means a person licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-23-1 et seq. to practice or teach landscape architecture. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings and customarily incidental accessory buildings or uses, including such open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot of record means a lot, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the plat or description of which has been recorded in said office. If a portion of a parcel has been conveyed at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the remaining portion of the lot or parcel will be considered a lot of record. 
Lot remnant means any portion of a lot not suitable for building upon because of size or topography and remaining after the transfer of other portions of the lot to adjoining lots. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. If a corner lot, the distance between lot lines measured along the front building line which parallels or more nearly parallels the rear lot line. 
Minor subdivision means a subdivision which does not involve the platting, construction, or opening of new streets, sewer, or water facilities, and those which do not involve improvements to existing streets. Minor subdivisions are subject only to the requirements of the final plat/plan stage and the recording/dedication requirements of this chapter. Minor subdivisions will be accepted by the planning commission and the mayor and council in the form of a final plat, which must comply with all requirements of this chapter concerning final plats. 
Owner of record means the owner of property as specified on the deed of the lot of record. 
Parks and playgrounds mean public or community land, open spaces, or recreation areas represented on a subdivision plat as dedicated, reserved, or intended to be reserved, for recreational purposes. 
Pedestrian way means a crosswalk or other areas designed and marked specifically for pedestrian traffic. 
Percentage of grade means, when measured down the street centerline, the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
Plat/plan means a map or plan representing a subdivided parcel of land or combination of lands, prepared for the purpose of installing and/or finalizing existing and proposed elements of a site to be developed; this would include preliminary and final plat/plans. 
(1)  Preliminary plat/plan means a plan showing the detailed design and layout of a subdivision of land, prepared for the purpose of development, and which includes all improvements and meets all requirements specified in this chapter. 
(2)  Final plat/plan means a plat of a subdivision unit, or phase of development, with legal descriptions of all lots, easements, open space and rights-of-way sufficient to reproduce the plat in the field, and which meets the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act of 1978, as amended. The final plat is intended for legal recording in the official deed book records of the county for lots, rights-of-way, easements, and restrictive covenants. 
(3)  Dedicated plat means a plat required for the dedication to the city or other public utility or authority of right-of-way for streets, public easements, sewer or water easements and facilities, or other public improvement. 
Preapplication review means an initial and informal stage of subdivision review at which the developer may make known preliminary plat proposals and the planning commission may respond and/or advise the developer concerning the subdivision regulations. 
Private street means any street within a planned development which meets appropriate public street design standards, but, for purposes of controlled access or privacy, is not dedicated to the city and is not public. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties, or conditions recorded with an approved plat and running with the title to the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the intent of protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of a given area. 
Public hearing means an official session of the planning commission or the mayor and council, advertised according to law and called for purposes specified in the public notice. 
Reserve strip means a strip or parcel of land along, around, or between properties for the purpose of restricting access. 
Review agency means any so designated agency other than the planning commission or the mayor and council which may review appropriate parts of plat submissions by reason of technical capability, authority or interest. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian access, vehicular access, or utility line installation. 
Road means a public or private right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to and between properties and designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, or place. 
(1)  Alley or service drive means a minor accessway used for service access or property access under specified circumstances to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(3)  Road width means the shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the road right-of-way. 
(4)  Local street/road means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties and to serve travel demands in the immediate area. For purposes of this chapter, a local street/road within the city shall be any street which is not designated as either a collector street/road and/or arterial street/road. 
(5)  Collector street/road means a street which usually serves to either provide direct access to lots or distribute traffic from individual lots or distribute traffic from individual lots to major streets or arterials. It may also connect neighborhoods with one another. It should be designed to discourage excessive speeds and through traffic. 
(6)  Arterial street/road means a street which usually serves to either provide direct access to lots or distribute traffic from individual lots and collector streets through the city. It may also connect neighborhoods with one another. It should be designed to discourage excessive speeds and through traffic. For purposes of this chapter, the following streets within the city are designated as arterial: Main Street f/k/a/ Georgia Highway 41, US s41/GA7, Zebulon Street, Birch Street, and Liberty Hill Street 
(7)  Tangent means a straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where the tangent meets the curve. 
Sight distance, intersection, means the distance measured form a vehicle's eye-height, measured from ground level to the eye-height of a motorist to a specific object to a specific distance based on the speed of oncoming vehicles. 
Sight distance, stopping, means the unobstructed vision of a motorist on a horizontal plane along a street centerline as measured from the motorist's eye-height. 
Soil erosion and sediment control plan means a plan for temporary and permanent facilities to control soil erosion and sedimentation on a construction site. (See Lamar County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance.) 
Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot of record at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived into three or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. 
(1)  This definition includes all of the following: 
a.  All divisions of land involving a new street. 
b.  All divisions of land involving a change in existing streets. 
c.  Any resubdivision of land. 
d.  The process of subdividing. 
e.  Any land or area subdivided. 
(2)  This definition does not include the following: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
b.  The transfer of property by the owner to a member of the immediate family (parent, spouse or child). 
c.  The transfer of unsubdivided land or the transfer of a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county prior to the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
d.  The division of land among heirs by judicial decree. 
e.  The division of land into parcels of five or more acres where no new street is involved. 
Surveyor, land, means one who is qualified to engage in the practice of land surveying and who possesses a current certificate of registration as a land surveyor issued by the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors. 
Zoning means the delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning administrator means the person designated or appointed by the mayor and council. 
Zoning district means the various zoning districts as defined in chapter 118. 
Zoning map means the official geographically defined document that is part of the city zoning ordinance (chapter 118) and delineates the boundaries of zoning and overlay districts. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, §§ 201, 202); Res. of 8-16-2005(2), § 2; Res. of 1-17-2006(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2007-7, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 114-2. - Purposes. 
This chapter seeks to encourage the development of desirable land use patterns within the city in accordance with the city land use plan. The promotion of sound land use patterns is intended to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of certain conditions which can threaten the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. This chapter should serve the following purposes: 
(1)  Encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities. 
(2)  Assure the provisions of required streets, utilities, facilities, and services to new land development. 
(3)  Assure the adequate protection of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land development. 
(4)  Assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
(5)  Assure in general the wise development of new areas in harmony with the city land use plan. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 104)) 
Sec. 114-3. - Minimum requirements. 
The provisions contained in this chapter shall be considered as minimum requirements. When the mayor and council or administrative officer imposes greater restrictions on a development that protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and that do not impose a hardship upon a developer/development or community, then those restrictions shall prevail. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 203)) 
Sec. 114-4. - Penalties for violations. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements including violation of conditions in connection with granted variances shall be a misdemeanor. A violation that shall be unattended or not fixed by the developer/subdivider within five working days or less shall be grounds for stoppage of any and all work started or permitted to be started until such violations are made. The violator shall also be required to pay any court costs that are lawfully imposed. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue but the city shall require that the violation be fixed, amended or altered to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 602)) 
Sec. 114-5. - Enforcement. 
The administrative officer shall administer the process for residential and nonresidential preliminary and final plans and shall be responsible for coordination of plans with all city and county agencies, departments, authorities, any affected city agencies/departments, and any state agencies. The administrative officer shall present to the mayor and council all final plans as a matter of record that such plans comply with or exceed the standards of this chapter. The administrative officer or his designee may authorize enforcement action if the developer/subdivider or any contractor/subcontractor fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable ordinances dealing with land development. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 601)) 
Sec. 114-6. - Appeals. 
Any appeal of a decision by the administrative officer, zoning administrator, or other city official regarding this chapter shall be presented in writing to the mayor and council within 15 days of the decision of said city official. The appeal shall set forth with particularity the specific violation that occurred, reference a specific section of this chapter, or a specific section of any other city ordinance, state law, regulation, etc., and give the name of the alleged violator. The city administrator shall review the application for completeness and schedule the appeal at the next regularly scheduled mayor and council meeting, provided that said meeting is more than ten days from the date of the appeal. The mayor and council shall review the appeal on the basis of the written request complying with the intent of the applicable zoning district, land use plan, and the standards of this chapter. The mayor and council shall consider a deviation from these standards under the procedures of section 118-32. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 603)) 
Secs. 114-7—114-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 114-31. - General standards. 
(a)  Within the territorial limits of the city, no person shall subdivide or rearrange a lot line of any lot or parcel of land or grade, install streets, utilities or make any improvements to a parcel of land without complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No residential or nonresidential final plat/plan of a development shall be recorded by the county clerk of superior court unless the same has been approved as provided herein. 
(c)  No building permits shall be issued or improvements or services authorized or installed in any unapproved development. 
(d)  The review and approval process for residential for nonresidential developments shall include a preapplication conference with the administrative officer. Nonresidential developments shall submit/present a preliminary/conceptual plan of the layout, architectural and sign designs of the project. 
(e)  The mayor and council constitutes the official platting authority of the city. No subdivision plat may be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it has first been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 401); Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 1) 
Sec. 114-32. - General overview of subdivision plat review and approval procedures. 
(a)  Introduction. The procedure for the formal review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of five required stages. These are as follows: 
(1)  Preapplication conference and preliminary/conceptual plan. 
(2)  Preliminary plat stage. 
(3)  Construction plan stage. 
(4)  Final plat stage. 
(5)  Recording and dedication stage. 
(b)  Preapplication conference and preliminary/conceptual plan. 
(1)  Every subdivider/developer shall consult with the administrative officer for advice and assistance prior to preparation of a preliminary plat/plan and submittal of an application for approval, as well as inquire as to the necessary documents and materials needed for a plan submittal. 
(2)  The purpose of the conference is to familiarize applicants with the development process of the city and the applicable ordinances and regulations necessary to guide a development appropriately. 
(3)  For developments requesting access onto state highways, the applicant should consult with and get confirmation from the state department of transportation. All projects affecting state, city or any county infrastructure (public streets, utilities, etc.) will need to be coordinated with the affected state, county, or city departments and/or authorities. 
(c)  Preliminary plat stage. The subdivider must submit to the planning commission for its recommendations thereon a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If the proposed subdivision abuts a state highway, a certificate of approval by the state department of transportation must accompany the preliminary plat submission. The subdivider must also furnish copies of such preliminary plat to all utility companies serving the area. The preliminary plat requires the review and approval of the mayor and council. 
(d)  Construction plan stage. Prior to making any street improvements or installing any utilities or other improvements, the subdivider must submit to the administrative officer construction plans of the proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The design presented in the construction plans must be in conformance with the general design information presented in the preliminary plat that was approved by the planning commission. The construction plan must show all street design profiles, topographic information, utility construction plans, sediment and erosion control plans, and other information as may be requested by the administrative officer. The construction plan stage requires the review and approval of the administrative officer and city engineer. 
(e)  Final plat stage. After completion of the physical development, or arrangements for physical development acceptable with the provisions of this chapter, of all or part of the area shown on the preliminary plat as approved by the mayor and council, and before selling any lots, a final plat together with the required certificates must be submitted to the mayor and council for approval. The subdivider must also furnish copies of the approved final plat to all utility companies serving the area. 
(f)  Recording and dedication. After the final plat is approved by the mayor and council, the final plat and appropriate documents become the instrument to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. After recording, the appropriate deeds and documents must be presented to the mayor and council for dedication and acceptance. 
(g)  Exception for minor subdivisions. Subdivisions which do not involve the platting, construction, or opening of new streets, sewers, or water facilities, or subdivisions which do not involve improvement to existing streets are defined as minor subdivisions. They are subject only to the requirements of the final plat stage and the recording and dedication stage. Subdivisions so defined will be accepted by the planning commission and the mayor and council in the form of a final plat, and the final plat must comply in all respects to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 2) 
Sec. 114-33. - Preapplication conference. 
(a)  Preliminary/conceptual plan. The subdivider/developer shall prepare and present a preliminary plan at the preapplication conference. The preliminary plan shall be a general design of the proposed subdivision including boundaries of the proposed subdivision and all lots, topographic contours, layout of lots and roads (including public roads adjacent to the subdivision), size and dimensions of the property and proposed lots (including lot area), delineation of creeks, streams, and all other bodies of water, open space and other planned improvements, and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the building and zoning department. 
(b)  Review of plan. Following the preapplication conference, the administrative officer shall review the preliminary plan and provide the applicant with the following items within seven working days: 
(1)  Verification of either compliance or noncompliance with chapter 118. 
(2)  Recommendations for improvement of the request with current ordinances and policies. 
(3)  Compliance with the city's land use plan. 
(4)  Recommendations or comments from other city departments, the county health department, and any county authority. 
(5)  Recommendations for improvements to the proposed development, its design, layout, zoning adjustments, etc. 
(c)  Application for appropriate zoning district. If the property is not in the correct zoning district for the proposed development, in order to continue with the development, the developer/subdivider will be required to apply for the appropriate zoning that is applicable to their request. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 402); Res. of 1-17-2006(3), §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 114-34. - Submission and approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Items to be submitted. The subdivider shall file with the planning commission the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of hearing and action on the preliminary plat is to be sent. 
(2)  Three copies of the preliminary plat and supporting data. At this time, the planning commission may direct the subdivider to furnish additional copies to the review agencies having appropriate technical expertise or proper authority for review and comment. 
(3)  If the proposed subdivision abuts a state highway, a certificate of approval of the proposed subdivision by the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Preliminary plat review. The planning commission will review the preliminary plat for conformance to this chapter and other relevant regulations and will consider the comments or suggestions of the appropriate review agencies requested to review the preliminary plat. The planning commission will indicate on the preliminary plat, or by a written memorandum attached to the preliminary plat any comments or suggested changes that are necessary to meet the intent of this chapter or to serve the best interests of the city. The planning commission shall forward the preliminary plat and any comments or suggested changes to the mayor and council for review. 
(c)  Action of the mayor and council. The mayor and council will either approve the plat, conditionally approve the plat (noting the conditions of approval on the plat), or not approve the plat. Action may be taken on the entire preliminary plat or any portion of it. 
(d)  Approval of preliminary plat. Approval of a preliminary plat is only tentative, pending submission of the final plat, and is effective and binding upon the mayor and council for a period of no more than two years. After two years, only the work on the subdivision that has been completed in conformance with the preliminary plat may be approved by the mayor and council. Before the two-year period expires, the subdivider may submit to the mayor and council a request in writing for an extension of time. If the mayor and council grants such an extension, work on the remainder of the subdivision may continue within the limits of the extension. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 403); Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 5) 
Sec. 114-35. - Required information for the preliminary plat/plan. 
The preliminary plat/plan shall meet the minimum standards of design and requirements for the construction of public improvements as provided in article III of this chapter, and shall have the following information: 
(1)  Description. 
a.  The proposed name of the development, including its units and/or phases of development. All phases or units of a development must be delineated on the submitted plan. 
b.  A plan layout of the proposed development and potential phases/units of development must be submitted for a development that has or may have more than two phases/units to it. 
c.  Names, addresses, telephone numbers, pager numbers, cell phone numbers of the subdivider, engineer, landscape architect, surveyor and project manager, as well as each person's e-mail address (if applicable). 
d.  Graphic scale north arrow, identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
e.  The date and revision schedule. 
f.  The location map showing the relationship of the development to the surrounding area, including identification of landmarks or distances to landmarks, within the area of the project. 
g.  Acreage to be divided and the total number of lots/parcels. 
h.  The proposed net and gross density for residential projects and the total square footage of buildings of nonresidential projects. The total approved density shall reflect the total net density of the entire project, including a running tally of all phases/units of the entire project unless otherwise approved, which may include approval of a net density per individually zoned properties within the development. 
i.  The lineal feet of proposed roads (per phase and total in project). 
j.  Zoning of property and all of that districts space standards, any special conditions of zoning, minimum house size, and minimum lot sizes. 
k.  Impervious surface calculations. 
l.  A 25-foot buffer, as defined in section 114-1, surrounding the boundary of the development. 
(2)  Existing conditions. 
a.  Topographic contours and vertical intervals of not more than two feet where new roads are involved. 
b.  The location and delineation of wooded/tree areas, vegetation, lakes, streams, creeks or other natural elements of the land. 
c.  Topographic data shall be based on field surveys or aerial photos. 
d.  The soil conditions according to the U.S. Soil Conservation Service Classifications Manual. 
e.  Current name and address of adjacent property owners, names of subdivisions, businesses, and/or nonresidential projects, including zoning of adjacent properties. 
f.  In the case of a submittal of a replatted development, a copy of the existing plat shall also be submitted. The word "replat" or "revised plat" shall be included on such document. 
g.  The location/delineation and calculations of the acreage of wetlands, floodplains, reservoirs, recharge areas, other bodies/sources of water and land subject to a 100-year flood hazard, including contour elevations. The plat shall state if elevations are taken from a surveyed stream on a FEMA map or if the elevations are from an independent study (HEC-2, QUICK-2, etc.). Wetland areas shall be field-located. 
h.  Delineation of such natural resources shall be indicated in a report from a registered soil scientist in the state. 
i.  State whether or not a project lies within a watershed protection district. 
j.  The location of existing and proposed property lines; location, width and names of all platted public roads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, and existing structures and/or landmarks. 
k.  The existing utility, sewer, water mains and lines, easements, drains, culverts, and/or other underground or aboveground facilities adjacent to or within the boundaries and rights-of-way of the proposed project. Included shall be the sizes, grades and invert elevations from field surveys or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. 
(3)  Proposed conditions. 
a.  The layout and names of proposed public roads, alleys, public walkways (bike trails, sidewalks, paths, etc.) with width of pavement and right-of-way, including the capability of the tract to be subdivided to connect to existing and future development of adjacent tracts. 
b.  The layout of all lots, including building setback lines, lot dimensions and area/square footage of lots, showing all existing and proposed easements (drainage, water, sewer, storm pipes, etc.) and their location on all lots. It shall also include the proximity (distance and location) of all adjacent easements and utilities. 
c.  Lots with detention ponds on them must meet the minimum zoning area requirements exclusive of the area of the pond. Lots with detention ponds must meet the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district to be declared a buildable lot. Homes or buildings may not be set closer than 20 feet to a detention/retention pond, regardless of the home/building compliance with the setback requirements. 
d.  Flood elevations on any lots within a 100-year flood hazard area. In addition, the foundation elevation that is a minimum of one foot above the established 100-year flood elevation shall be shown. This data may be shown either on the lot layout or in tabular form. The flood hazard area shall include both studied and unstudied streams, including drainageways as designated on the preliminary plat. 
e.  Construction plans of roads, including typical cross section and grade profiles, shall show the percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. The minimum centerline stopping sight distance for interior roads is 200 feet. 
f.  Construction plans of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size, and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
g.  Show the centerline stopping distance for all points of access onto state and county public roads, showing posted speed limits of such public roads. 
h.  As-built construction plans of storm drainage systems with grade, pipe sizes, lengths, location of outlets, runoff and velocity calculations, and other drainage structures. All storm drainage systems carrying off-site runoff shall be designed for the 100-year storm event. All storm pipes within the public road right-of-way shall be asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe. 
i.  Improvement construction plans of water supply systems with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves, and all other appurtenances. 
j.  Draft of proposed deed restrictions/covenants to be imposed on any or all parcels within the development. 
k.  Easements for drainage and proposed and existing water and sewer lines and utilities along the side and rear lot lines or wherever else they may be placed, and watercourses as required in section 114-66(a). 
l.  A proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
m.  Final contours. In some cases, the street profiles will suffice in showing the amount of cut and fill; however, in all cases, final contours need to be shown on the plans. 
n.  Show a five-foot high fence surrounding all detention ponds with a 100-year pond elevation over four feet, and a ten-foot-wide gate to be located as to provide the best vehicular access. Vegetation shall be planted around all fences in order to minimize the visual impact the fencing has on a development, except at the designated gate area. 
o.  Detail drawings. Any structural practice used should be explained and illustrated with detail drawings and must meet minimum city standards. 
(4)  Notes on plans. Show the following notes on all plans: 
a.  All storm sewer, sanitary sewer, water, etc., easements exist where such utilities are placed. If placed on or along property lines, such utilities or infrastructure shall be centered on lot lines. All easements shall include an indication of their width. 
b.  All storm drains shall be extended a minimum of 30 feet behind any home or building. 
c.  Grade stakes shall be set on all streets prior to any street grading. An as-built subgrade centerline profile shall be submitted to and approved by the city for approval prior to grading. 
d.  Total amount of impervious surface of the entire site. No site shall exceed 25 percent impervious surface. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 404); Ord. No. 2007-9, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 114-36. - Submission and approval of construction plans. 
(a)  Construction plan submission. After the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been given approval by the mayor and council, the subdivider shall, within two years of that approval, submit construction plans to the administrative officer. 
(b)  Format. Three copies of the construction plans must be submitted to the administrative officer. The scale on the construction plans shall not be less than 100 feet to the inch. 
(c)  Review of construction plans. The administrative officer shall review the construction plans for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other pertinent city ordinances and regulations. 
(d)  Submission of construction plans to city engineer. Upon completion of the administrative officer's initial review, the administrative officer shall submit one or more copies of the construction plans to the city engineer for review. 
(e)  Approval of construction plans. The city engineer shall approve or disapprove the construction plans within 60 days of receipt of the plans. If the plans are disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified in writing of the reasons for disapproval. Upon receipt of the revised construction plans, the city engineer shall approve or disapprove the revised construction plans within 60 days from receipt of the revisions. The city engineer's approval of the construction plans/revised construction plans shall authorize the administrative officer to issue a land-disturbance permit and/or grading permit so that the subdivider may begin construction. Approval of construction plans constitutes authorization to proceed with the installation of any required improvements, subject to the approval of agencies having the proper authority over such individual improvements, and the preparation of the final plat, or unit division or phase or unit division. 
(Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 6) 
Sec. 114-37. - Specifications for construction plans. 
The construction plan must meet the minimum standards of design set forth in this chapter and must include the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the construction plans, giving the name, address and telephone number of the subdivider submitting the plan. 
(2)  Two copies of the approved preliminary plat. 
(3)  Construction plans of roads, including typical cross section and grade profiles, showing the percent of each grade and length of each vertical curve. The minimum centerline stopping sight distance for interior roads shall be 200 feet. 
(4)  Field run or aerial topographic map referenced to a datum of mean sea level with contour intervals not to exceed two feet. 
(5)  Storm drainage. 
a.  Locations, calculations (pipe size, velocity, grade, drainage area, quantity of runoff) and profiles for all drainage structures. 
b.  Sizing of storm drainage shall be based on a 100-year frequency storm. 
c.  In cases where the developer chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, then the trench may be left open; however, in any case, an easement of 20 feet shall be shown on the plat and no building or driveway shall be built over or within 40 feet of the open drainage easement. 
d.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and the drain is crossed by a driveway, the size of the pipe shall be determined by the engineer designing the subdivision. 
e.  Storm drainage shall extend at least 30 feet beyond the minimum required front yard setback. 
f.  All storm pipes within the public road right-of-way shall be asphalt coated corrugated metal pipe. 
(6)  Water and sanitary sewer plans (if applicable) with grades, service, pipe size, and points of discharge and connection to other trunk or lateral sewers. 
(7)  Site grading plan with soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(8)  The 100-year floodplain must be depicted accurately and bear the certification of a registered professional engineer or professional surveyor and the sources of all data shall be identified on the plan. 
(9)  Hydrology study. 
a.  The hydrology study will be required on storm frequencies of two, five, ten, 25, 50, and 100 years. 
b.  Detention is required for storm frequencies of two, five, ten, 25, 50, and 100 years. No additional runoff will be allowed over the predeveloped rate. All detention facilities shall be fenced with a cyclone fence a minimum of six feet in height. Potential access to detention facilities shall be provided by means of a 15-foot minimum width fence gate, latched and locked five or more feet abovegrade, a 15-foot minimum width easement to a public right-of-way. 
c.  Pertinent hydrographs and detail of detention facilities (plan and profile views). 
d.  Detail of outlet structure and any other data necessary for hydrology. 
e.  Detention requirements for any development located adjacent to a watercourse with a drainage basin significantly larger than the area proposed for development may include a required timing study analysis. If required, such study must comply with the guidelines set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual utilizing acceptable methods for determining flow path times and hydrographs. HEC-1 models must be utilized to produce hydrographs of the site and basin for use in determining peak flow rates at the study point determined to be the critical point of study. The ten percent rule outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual should be utilized in studying the downstream impact of development and reported in the study. A predesign meeting will be required before plans or a study is developed and submitted for review. 
(10)  Certifications. The following certificates shall be inscribed on the construction plans: 
a.  I hereby certify that the engineering requirements for this construction plan as prescribed by the Development Ordinance of the City of Milner, Georgia, have been fulfilled. 
___________ 
Registered Professional Engineer No. _______ 
Date: ________ 
b.  I hereby certify that this construction plan was approved by the City of Milner on _______. 
            __________________              Administrative Officer 
(Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 7) 
Sec. 114-38. - Submission and approval of final plat. 
(a)  Final plat submission. After the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been given tentative approval by the mayor and council, construction plans have been approved by the administrative officer and city engineer, and required improvements have been completed (or arrangements therefor approved), the subdivider must, within two years from the date of the preliminary plat approval, apply for final plat approval. The subdivider must submit to the mayor and council the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to be notified of the action on the final plat. 
(2)  Six paper copies of the final plat and other documents as may be specified, and the original tracing or reproducible print of the original tracing drawn in permanent ink or equivalent on Mylar, which bears the certificates as required by this section. The scale of the plat must be not less than 100 feet to the inch. 
(3)  Any and all appropriate documents (including but not limited to a deed of transfer) and plans as constructed and request that the city accept dedicated streets, other public spaces and utilities. 
(b)  Final plat review. The mayor and council will review the final plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat as well as with this chapter and other relevant regulations. 
(c)  Action of the mayor and council. The mayor and council will either issue a certificate of approval for recording, conditionally approve the plat (noting the conditions of approval on the plat), or disapprove the plat. If the final plat is conditionally approved, once the subdivider has complied with the conditions indicated, the mayor and council will issue a certificate of approval on the plat, or disapprove the plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the mayor and council will notify the subdivider in writing, stating the reasons for the disapproval. One copy of the original of the plat will be returned to the subdivider, and one copy will be made part of the records of the mayor and council. Action may be taken on the entire final plat or any portion of it. 
(d)  Approval of final plat. Approval of the final plat authorizes the subdivider to proceed with the recording and dedication procedures. 
(e)  Copies of final plat to government departments. Upon approval of the final plat by the mayor and council, the subdivider shall be responsible for providing one copy of the final plat to each of the following departments: 
(1)  City building and zoning department; 
(2)  County tax assessor's office; 
(3)  County board of education; 
(4)  County sheriff/911 office; 
(5)  County voter registration office; and 
(6)  Postmaster of the city. 
(f)  Other items for consideration. Other important items necessary for consideration of final plat approval by the mayor and council shall consist of: 
(1)  Completion of public improvements. The developer shall contact the building and zoning department for a checklist specifying the procedure in obtaining the various approvals from the city which will release the subdivision or final plat consideration. 
(2)  Bonds and/or letters of credit required. The developer/subdivider shall be required to post the following bonds and/or letters of credit: 
a.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (f)(2), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (f)(2)a, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bond means a performance guaranty given in a form satisfactory to the administrative officer. A surety, to be acceptable, will be required to meet the criteria in subsection (f)(2)b of this section: 
Letter of credit means an irrevocable letter of credit given in a form satisfactory to the administrative officer and drawn upon a banking or other financial institution licensed to do business in the state. At a minimum, the letter of credit shall provide for the immediate and unconditional drawing of any or all of the amount of the letter upon presentment and demand for payment. 
b.  Surety regulations. A company holding a certificate of authority as an acceptable surety on federal bonds, as published in the latest such listing in the Federal Register; and an insurance company licensed to do business within the state as a company writing policies of insurance and/or bonds, regulated as such by the state department of insurance, and a participant in the state insurance and solvency pool, and meeting the following additional criteria: 
1.  A company with a rating in the A.M. Best Companies' most recent published rating of "A++ or A+: Class IV or larger." 
2.  A company with a rating in the A.M. Best Companies' most recent published rating of "A: Class V or larger." 
3.  A company with a rating in the A.M. Best Companies' most recent published rating of "A-: Class X or larger." 
4.  A company which can furnish an assumption certificate or cut through clause in a statement of coverage under which payment is guaranteed 100 percent to third-party claimants by a reinsurer with a rating in the A.M. Best Companies' most recent published rating of "A or A+: Class V or larger." 
5.  In lieu of the A.M. Best Company Rating, insurers rated AAA, AA+, AA, AA- by Standard and Poors Insurance Rating Services will also be acceptable. 
c.  Maintenance bond/letter of credit. The developer/subdivider shall be required to post either a bond or, in the sole discretion of the administrative officer, a letter of credit in an amount at least equal to that necessary to cover the cost of infrastructure improvements upon neglect or abandonment of the project. 
d.  Residential bond/letter of credit. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit for a residential development shall not be less than $20.00 per lineal foot of road and $2.00 per lineal foot of sidewalks within the development. 
e.  Nonresidential bond/letter of credit. The amount of the maintenance bond/letter of credit for a nonresidential development shall not be less than $20.00 per lineal foot of road within the development. 
f.  Landscape bond/letter of credit. The maintenance bond/letter of credit shall state, in addition to all other amounts listed in this section, sufficient funding available to cover the cost of required landscaping or vegetating a site of development. Tree replacement, ground cover replacement, or buffer replacement shall be the responsibility of the developer/subdivider in addition to the required landscape plan provided for in chapter 118. The additional amount of the bond/letter of credit shall be set by the administrative officer or, in his absence, by the city administrator. Additional costs to the city outside of the amount of the bond shall be charged to the developer/subdivider and shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
g.  Duration of bond/letter of credit. The maintenance bond/letter of credit required by subsection (f)(2)c of this section shall have an initial duration of two years and shall be renewed, in the sole discretion of the mayor and council, for additional terms of two years until two years after completion of all public improvements as required for final plats. Except as otherwise provided in this section, upon final inspection and certification from the county that all infrastructure work covered under the bond is satisfactorily completed, in good condition, and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and construction standards, the maintenance bond/letter of credit shall be released. 
h.  Developments with multiple phases of construction. For developments with multiple phases of construction, separate maintenance bonds/letters of credit may be accepted by the administrative officer for each phase. However, where improvements in one phase of a development connect or are integrated in another phase, the maintenance bonds/letters of credit given on one, multiple, or all phases of development may, when, in the sole discretion of the administrative officer and/or the mayor and council it is necessary, be renewed until certification from the city that all infrastructure work within the development as a whole is satisfactorily completed, in good condition, and in compliance with all applicable laws. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 405); Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 8) 
Sec. 114-39. - Necessary final plat/plan documentation. 
The final plat and acceptance of public improvements will be presented to the administrative officer along with the following items at a final review meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to determine completion of all infrastructure improvements, notify the developer of additional requirements necessary to move forward, confirm approval of all city agencies, departments, and authorities, and to ensure that all required documentation is accurate and that all fieldwork is in compliance with this article. The following items shall be presented to the administrative officer during the final plat review meeting: 
(1)  Completed application form. 
(2)  Final plat/plan drawn to the required standard set forth in section 114-41. 
(3)  Copy of all materials test results for base and asphalt paving (core test). 
(4)  Verification from the appropriate city departments and authorities that all required inspections have been made and approved and that improvements to the subdivision, including street construction, sidewalks, drainage systems, and right-of-way seeking/sod, are in compliance with the approved plans. This would include the installation of all utilities (below ground), street and traffic signs, and any other appropriate and necessary improvements as required by the city. 
(5)  Verification from the county that the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the development is in compliance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(6)  Verification from the city engineer that all water and sewer requirements have been met, including submission of required documents and inspections. 
(7)  Two-year maintenance bond/letter of credit. 
(8)  Two-year landscape bond/letter of credit. 
(9)  A bond/letter of credit for water and sewer system improvements submitted to and approved by the authority. 
(10)  As-built drawings of all water and sewerage facilities as approved by the city engineer, including the grade, pipe sizes and points of discharge. 
(11)  Soil study for developments not using public sewerage, including recommendation or comments provided from the health department. 
(12)  As-built drawings of streets, sidewalks, storm drainage systems and stormwater retention. The minimum required as-built information to be submitted with the final plat application shall include the following: 
a.  The existing centerline profile of all newly constructed streets. 
b.  The size, material, length, slope, invert elevations and accurate location of all storm drain pipes. 
c.  The top and invert elevations of all drainage structures. 
d.  An as-built topographical survey of all detention basins and details of existing outlet structures, including calculations showing volumes and outflow rates. A registered professional engineer, surveyor or licensed landscape architect, shall prepare the as-built drawings at a minimum scale of 100 feet to the inch. 
(13)  Processing fee. 
(14)  Master plan of all phases for developments with more than two homes. 
(15)  Conceptual drawing of all nonresidential developments, including architectural colors and facade materials. 
(16)  Results of density tests of all areas of fill and/or compaction. 
(17)  A set of as-built plans submitted to the building and zoning department in such format as the administrative officer may specify from time to time. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 406)) 
Sec. 114-40. - Processing fee prerequisite to final plat approval. 
Prior to the approval of the final plat application in the review meeting, the developer shall pay a fee to the building and zoning department. This fee and time of payment of the payment shall be set by the mayor and council from time to time and shall be set forth on the final plat application form. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 407)) 
Sec. 114-41. - Final plat/plan required information. 
The final plat shall include the following items including the requirements from section 114-35: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone numbers, and e-mail address of the owner of record of the development, including the main contact or project manager. Project management changes shall be given to the administrative officer within 24 hours of such changes. 
(2)  Certification by a surveyor that all monuments exist and that their sizes, locations and materials are correctly shown on the plat. 
(3)  The legal description of the property, including reference to land lot and district lines, street right-of-way lines, easements and other right-of-way infrastructure/utility locations. All street right-of-way boundaries, street names, addresses, tax identification numbers, bearings and angles of intersections shall be identified. 
(4)  All lot lines measured to the 0.01 of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in 10,000 feet. 
(5)  The stipulation of deed restrictions and/or covenants on the property. 
(6)  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc. 
(7)  Detention pond maintenance and access easement with a minimum 20-foot width, extending to the nearest public right-of-way, and the location of all storm drains (if applicable) including pipe sizes. 
(8)  Any buffer areas required in chapter 118, including statements whether or not the buffer areas are to be enhanced with additional landscape materials, remain undisturbed, fenced, or a combination of all screening and protection techniques. 
(9)  Individual lot sizes measured in square feet placed either in a table or on the individual lots. 
(10)  The outline of all property to be dedicated or reserved for public use or to be reserved for common use of all property owners in the subdivision with the purpose of the dedication or reservation indicated. 
(11)  The location of sidewalks and pedestrian or bicycle ways and their length and width. 
(12)  If wetlands lie within the development or unit/phase, the plat must include the following notation: 
Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Lot owners may be subject to penalty by law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization. 
(13)  The following notation shall be included on all final plats: 
This plat is hereby approved for recording by Lamar County, Georgia 
Date: ___________ 
By: Building and Zoning Department 
(14)  A notation to read as follows: 
The city assumes no responsibility for the overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, nor for the extension of culverts beyond the points shown on this plat and as required by the City of Milner Development Ordinance. 
(15)  Notation that all storm drains shall be extended a minimum of 30 feet behind any future residence or building. 
(16)  A statement to read as follows: 
All street rights-of-way, sidewalks, and designated easements and properties shown herein are specifically dedicated to the City of Milner for public use and, upon recording, are accepted by the city. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 408)) 
Sec. 114-42. - Individual lot divisions. 
This section outlines the process for approving an individual residential plat that is not part of a subdivision. All applicants shall include the following information on all individual plat submittals. The building and zoning department shall check the plat for accuracy and for compliance with other city ordinances. The following information shall be included on each plat/survey: 
(1)  The zoning of property, including setback information; 
(2)  The correct land lot and district; 
(3)  The scale of measurement (preferably; one inch: 100 feet or one inch: 50 feet); 
(4)  Notes which indicate if the property is in a 100-year floodplain, wetland and/or watershed district, or if any other bodies of water are on the property, and indicate this on the property; 
(5)  Dimensions and acreage of property; 
(6)  The proposed and existing easements and setbacks on site; 
(7)  Contours at two-foot or five-foot intervals; 
(8)  North arrow; 
(9)  The engineer's/surveyor's seal, signature, phone number, address, and email address (if applicable); 
(10)  Iron pins set at all corners unless otherwise noted; 
(11)  A 20-foot drainage easement and sanitary easement shown inside all rear lot lines and all easements shown on side and/or front lot lines; 
(12)  A notation stating that the city assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way; nor for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on this plat; 
(13)  All storm drains shall be extended a minimum of 30 feet behind future residences; 
(14)  The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of at least one foot in 10,000 feet; 
(15)  A statement that this plat has been calculated for closure and is accurate within at least one foot in 10,000 feet; 
(16)  All lot lines measured to 0.01 of a foot. The bearings shall be indicated for all lot lines to the nearest second. The error of closure should not be less than one foot in 10,000 feet; 
(17)  The stipulation of deed restrictions and/or covenants on the property (if any); 
(18)  The lengths of all arcs, including radii, points of curvature, tangent bearings, and the length and bearing of the long cord of every arc; 
(19)  Restrictive covenants and/or conditions of zoning (if any); and 
(20)  These and all other standards as described in section 114-41 shall apply to the approval of individual plats. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 409)) 
Sec. 114-43. - Recording and dedication. 
(a)  Recording of final plat. Upon approval of a final plat, the subdivider must have the final plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider will be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of recording of the final plat. 
(b)  Dedication of platted streets, other public spaces and utilities. Final plat approval by the mayor and council does not constitute acceptance of any dedications of platted streets, other public spaces and utilities to the public. Acceptance of dedication may only be accomplished by separate action of the mayor and council upon review of the documents and deeds submitted in accordance with section 114-38(a)(3). 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A § 410); Res. of 1-17-2006(3), § 9) 
Sec. 114-44. - Administrative variances. 
(a)  The administrative officer may grant the following types of variances, without jeopardizing the intent and integrity of this chapter and all applicable or related ordinances to a development: 
(1)  The administrative officer shall have the authority to approve a ten percent variance in regards to front, side and rear setbacks. A ten percent variance on dimensions of a lot may also be granted on no more than 20 percent of all the lots of a development, exclusive of any amenity area dimensions. Variances on open space or other dedicated space shall require approval of the mayor and council. Variances shall be granted upon the following principles: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district. 
b.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
c.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties within the city or within a similar zoning or overlay district. 
d.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter, the specific zoning of the property and the land use plan and will not be injurious to the general welfare of the community. 
e.  The special circumstances or justifications for the variance are not the result or cause of the self imposed actions or misfortunes of the applicant. 
f.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures which is not permitted by right in the overlaying zoning district or scheme of the land use plan. 
g.  The variance requested is the minimum reasonable variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(2)  Minor variances may be authorized by the administrative officer, city administrator, or designated civil engineer of the city concerning the layout of streets, lots and blocks in situations where physical characteristics of the property create practical difficulty or hardship by strict compliance of the regulations of this article. A consultation with at least three of these individuals, the developer and appropriate inspectors shall be required as part of the review process of granting a deviation in street, lot and block standards. A written report shall be followed detailing the reasons why the variance was need and why it was or was not granted. Such report shall be filed with the preliminary and final plat of the development. 
(b)  All other variance requests above and beyond those mentioned in this section shall require approval from the mayor and council at a public hearing. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 411)) 
Secs. 114-45—114-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 114-62. - General requirements. 
(a)  Suitability of land. Land on which there is a danger to health, safety, or property must not be platted for residential use or other use that will continue or increase such danger, unless such hazards can be and are corrected. Examples of such conditions are as follows: 
(1)  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion. 
(2)  Land with excessive slope or other physical constraints which make it unsuitable for development. 
(b)  Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the building and zoning department. The name must not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(c)  Access. Access to every subdivision must be provided over a public street, and every lot within a subdivision must be served by a publicly dedicated street or a private street meeting the standards of a public street and approved by the planning commission. 
(d)  Conformance with adopted land use plan. Proposed subdivisions must conform with the adopted city land use plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the planning commission. When features of the city land use plan, such as sites for schools, public buildings, parks, major streets, or other public uses, are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, such features must be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
(e)  Community assets. In all subdivisions, due regard must be shown for all natural features such as large trees, watercourses, historical sites, and similar community assets which will add attractiveness and value to the property if preserved. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 501)) 
Sec. 114-63. - Streets. 
All streets established in the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived must comply with the following development standards: 
(1)  Continuation of existing streets. Wherever slope will permit, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision must provide for the alignment and continuation or projection of existing streets into adjoining areas. Existing streets must be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(2)  Street names. Streets or roads that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets should have the same name as the existing street. The names of new streets and roads are subject to the approval of the planning commission and must not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names, even if the suffix street, avenue, drive, etc., is different. 
(3)  Development along arterial streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on either side of the right-of-way of the arterial street to provide access to lots along the arterial street while avoiding direct driveway curb cuts on the arterial street. Such a street may either abut the arterial street or railroad right-of-way or be located a suitable distance away to allow an appropriate use of the intervening land with a nonaccess reservation along the arterial street and a buffer. In such cases, lots must have access only from the access street. 
(4)  Intersections. The centerlines of no more than two streets may intersect at any one point. Streets must be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street may intersect at any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. 
(5)  Offset intersections (street jogs). Offset intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are not permitted. 
(6)  Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac). Local streets designed to have one end permanently closed and not connected with any existing street, proposed future street, or not intended to extend to the property line of an adjacent tract, shall be no longer than seven times the lot width provided by chapter 118, unless necessary due to the topographic or other physical conditions of the property. 
a.  Permanent. Permanent dead-end streets shall be joined by a cul-de-sac with a paved turnaround having an outside diameter of 82 feet (41-foot radius) and a right-of-way of at least 110 feet diameter. Dead-end streets designed to be permanent and that exceed more than 800 feet in length may be required to have a cul-de-sac turnaround midway between the entrance intersection and the end of the street to provide maneuvering for emergency vehicles, when the dead-end street is the only street in a subdivision. 
b.  Temporary. Stub streets which are intended to provide access for which are intended to provide access for future development within a tract of land or adjacent tracts shall be required to have a temporary turnaround area having a diameter of at least 80 feet, consisting of six inches of graded aggregate base. For developments with a temporary turnaround, it shall be required of the subdivider to provide a bond or letter of credit equal to the cost of permanent cul-de-sac construction, in accordance with the standards of this section for a period of two years. Failure of the subdivider to extend the street or to construct a permanent cul-de-sac shall result in the county using the bond or letter of credit funds to complete the cul-de-sac construction. In his sole discretion, the zoning administrator may require streets within a development to connect. 
(7)  Split-level streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two trafficways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, must provide any additional right-of-way required by this chapter when cut and fill techniques have been used in the construction of the street. 
(8)  Alleys. Alleys or service drives may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments, but also may be provided in one- or two-family residential development. 
(9)  Minimum required street right-of-way width. The right-of-way is the perpendicular distance across a street from property line to property line. The minimum required street right-of-way is as follows: 
a.  Arterial street: 100 feet. 
b.  Collector street: 60 feet. 
c.  Local street: 50 feet. 
d.  Alley/service: 24 feet. 
e.  Cul-de-sac: 100 feet diameter. 
(10)  Minimum required street pavement width with curb and gutter. Pavement width with curb and gutter is measured from back of curb to back of curb. The minimum required street pavement width with curb and gutter is as follows: 
a.  Arterial street: 12 feet per lane plus four feet for curb and gutter. 
b.  Collector street: 24 feet. 
c.  Local street: 24 feet. 
d.  Alley/service: 16 feet. 
e.  Cul-de-sac: 82 feet diameter. 
(11)  Additional right-of-way for cut and fill. Where cut and fill techniques are to be used in the construction of a street, the right-of-way width must be increased above the required minimum two feet for each one foot of material removed for the cut or added for the fill. This additional right-of-way must be added to the side where the cut or fill takes place. The maximum allowable degree of slope on a back slope is 1.5 to one, and on a fill slope the maximum allowable degree of slope is two to one. 
(12)  Additional right-of-way on existing streets. In subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, the subdivider must dedicate additional rights-of-way to meet stated minimum right-of-way requirements as follows: 
a.  Where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street, the entire right-of-way must be provided. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way measured from the centerline of the existing roadway must be provided. 
(13)  Construction standards for streets. All streets, alleys, and service drives must be prepared and paved according to the following methods or by equivalent methods that are acceptable to the planning and zoning department: 
a.  Base. The base must consist either of select topsoil, sand clay, or other approved material having a minimum thickness of five inches after being thoroughly compacted: The base must be constructed on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades, and typical cross sections as shown in the approved construction plans. Specific standards for the base are as follows: 
1.  All materials must be of an approved type. 
2.  All materials must be mixed to the extent necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogeneous mixture. 
3.  As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base must be brought to the approximate line, grade, and cross section, and then rolled with a sheepsfoot roller until the roller walks out. Then the base material must be rolled with a pneumatic tire or general purpose roller until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly. Defects must be remedied as soon as they are discovered. 
4.  The base course must be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridges, and dustings. It must be kept true to the approved cross section until it is primed. 
5.  Base material must not be deposited or shaped when subgrade conditions are freezing, thawing, or otherwise unfavorable for stability. 
b.  Pavement. Wearing surface must conform to mixes found suitable by the state department of transportation or an independent testing laboratory. Wearing surface must be applied after a prime coat. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative officer, pavement must be constructed as follows: 
1.  The prime coat must be cut-back asphalt or cut-back asphalt emulsion applied on a clean, slightly damp surface in an amount of from 0.10—0.30 of a gallon per square yard, depending upon the nature and condition of the surface. 
2.  The wearing surface must consist of either an approved plant mix prepared in a central plant and composed of aggregate and bituminous materials having an in-place minimum compacted thickness of 1.5 inches; or a triple surface treatment consisting of the following materials: a first application of AC-10 (0.30—0.40 of a gallon), first spreading of aggregate (0.45—0.55 cubic foot, size five), second application of AC-10 (0.35—0.40 of a gallon), second spreading of aggregate (0.13 cubic feet, size seven), third application of AC-10 (0.15—0.20 of a gallon), and third spreading of aggregate (0.14 cubic foot, size eight). 
c.  Seals. Care and caution must be taken that all points between such structures as manholes and curbs, and the surface mixture are well sealed. 
(14)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips designed as nonaccess reservations to control access to streets or other areas and must be dedicated to the city. 
(15)  Buffers. Buffers designed to separate incompatible land uses, as required in certain cases by chapter 118, at least ten feet wide and must be maintained by the property owner to the specifications of the city. 
(16)  Grades. All street grades must conform to the state department of transportation geometric design standards for each class of street as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets must conform to standards for Class IV roads. 
b.  Collector streets must conform to standards for Class V roads. 
c.  Local streets and others must conform to standards for Class VI roads. 
(17)  Horizontal curvature. The minimum radii or centerline curvature must conform to the state department of transportation geometric design standards for each class of street as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets must conform to standards for Class IV roads. 
b.  Collector streets must conform to standards for Class V roads. 
c.  Local streets and others must conform to standards for Class VI roads. 
(18)  Tangents. All tangents between reverse curves must conform to the state department of transportation geometric design standards for each class of street as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets must conform to standards for Class IV roads. 
b.  Collector streets must conform to standards for Class V roads. 
c.  Local streets and others must conform to standards for Class VI roads. 
(19)  Vertical alignment. Vertical alignment (stopping sight distance), measured between points 4½ above the centerline of the street, must conform to the state department of transportation geometric design standards for each class of street as follows: 
a.  Arterial streets must conform to standards for Class IV roads. 
b.  Collector streets must conform to standards for Class V roads. 
c.  Local streets and others must conform to standards for Class VI roads. 
(20)  Curbline radii. At street intersections, property lines must be rounded with a curb radius of 20 feet. However, in situations where the angle of intersection of two streets is less than 90 degrees, the planning commission may permit comparable cut-offs in chords in place of rounded corners. 
(21)  Right-of-way radius. The right-of-way radius at street intersections must parallel the curbline radius. 
(22)  Steep slope development. Street design and construction in areas of steep slopes are subject to variance from the development standards contained in this chapter if deemed by the zoning commission to be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter. If such a variance is ordered, the administrative officer will establish appropriate design and construction standards on an individual basis. 
(23)  Grading. All streets, roads, and alleys must be graded by the developer in such a manner that pavements and other improvements (sidewalks and curb and gutter) will be constructed to the required cross section. The minimum width of grading must be the pavement width as specified in this chapter, plus six feet on each side measured from the back of curb or pavement edge. Deviation from the above will be allowed only when due to special topographical (slope) conditions. 
a.  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area must first be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, other objectionable materials, and trees not intended for preservation. 
b.  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders, and other obstructions must be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, must be scarified (broken up and loosened) to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
c.  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clay, etc., must be removed from the roadway. The fill must be spread in layers no more than 12 inches thick and compacted. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to the roller must be mechanically tamped. 
d.  Subgrade. The subgrade must be properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades, and typical cross sections as shown on required drawings and approved by the administrative officer. Unsuitable material must be excavated and replaced with acceptable compacted material. 
(24)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks are required on both sides of the street in all subdivisions and must be constructed to the following development standards: 
a.  They must be at least four feet wide; 
b.  They must be a distance of at least two feet from the street curb, unless prior permission is obtained from the administrative officer; and 
c.  They must be installed according to required construction plans as approved by the administrative officer. 
(25)  Street name signs. Street name signs must be installed at intersections within a subdivision. The location and design of such signs must be approved by the administrative officer. 
(26)  Street trees. The planting of street trees is encouraged. The subdivider is encouraged to plant trees along the street to enhance the appearance of the subdivision. Such trees, if planted on a street right-of-way, must be planted in a manner to insure that there will be no conflict with utility lines either above or below the ground surface. The type and placement of street trees must be approved by the planning commission. 
(27)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(28)  Relation to adjoining road system. Where appropriate to the subdivision design, proposed roads shall be continuous and in alignment with existing, planned, or platted roads with which they are to connect. 
a.  Proposed roads shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with existing and future development of adjacent tracts. 
b.  Whenever there exists adjoining the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted half-street or alley, the other half-street shall be platted. 
(29)  Mailboxes. All mailboxes in a subdivision shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (29), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (29)a, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mailbox means any freestanding or detached structure, container, or receptacle for the delivery of United States Postal Service mail. 
Masonry means brick, stone, concrete, and all other substances or materials having like properties of weight or immovability. 
b.  This subsection (29) shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Any preexisting mailbox; or 
2.  Any mailbox upon which substantial work has begun by the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
c.  Mailboxes shall be located so as to comply with the rules and regulations of the United States Postmaster General. On roadways without a curb, mailboxes shall be set back eight feet from the edge of the roadway so as to allow the mail carrier to pull the postal delivery vehicle completely off the travel lanes of the roadway to deliver the mail. Where shoulder width does not allow for such a distance, the mailbox shall be set back the maximum distance possible from the roadway. Under no circumstances may the location of such a mailbox interfere with the safe use of a roadway by the traveling public. Any mailbox which fails to conform to the location requirements as provided herein shall be unlawful and deemed a public nuisance. 
d.  It shall be unlawful to construct and/or maintain a mailbox which fails to meet the construction specifications enumerated in subsection (29)e of this section. 
e.  In order to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the traveling public and to ensure uniform standards of function and beautification of the city road system, mailboxes shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  The support structure or post of the mailbox shall not be constructed with masonry material or of any material which will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
2.  The encasement or housing for the mailbox itself shall not be made of a masonry material or of any other material that will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
3.  All posts shall have a maximum width of four inches by four inches or, if round, shall have a diameter no greater than of four inches. If a metal pole is used to support the mailbox, such pole shall be hollow. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 502); Res. of 1-17-2006(1), §§ 2—5; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 114-64. - Improvement to existing roads and rights-of-way. 
Every subdivision which is located along and/or has lots which have frontage along an existing public road, which is deficient relative to city specifications, shall be resurfaced and widened for the full length of the frontage of the subdivision as determined by the city's appointed engineer. The minimum right-of-way required according to section 114-63 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. The developer shall be responsible for all costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Existing paved public road. Any existing paved city road upon which a subdivision has frontage and access, and which is deficient relative to city specifications, shall be resurfaced and widened for the full length of the frontage of the subdivision as determined by the city's appointed engineer. The minimum right-of-way required according to section 114-63 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. The developer shall be responsible for all costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Existing unpaved public road. Any unpaved public street upon which a subdivision has frontage and access shall be paved and widened according to the functional class of the public road (see section 114-63) along the frontage of the subdivision to the nearest intersection with a paved city or county public street. The minimum right-of-way according to section 114-63 shall be dedicated along the entire frontage of the subdivision. The developer shall be responsible for all costs incurred in meeting the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Right-of-way acquisition. In the event that the proposed subdivision has frontage on a road with less than the required minimum right-of-way, the developer shall contact each property owner having road frontage along the county road where the paving is to be extended and determine whether or not they desire to participate in the paving of the road and obtain such right-of-way deeds as are required by the city. If the developer cannot acquire the required number of property owners to consent, the city will acquire the necessary right-of-way through any means necessary, including condemnation. The developer shall be required to pay to the city the estimated costs for acquisition including, but not limited to, appraisals, engineers, legal fees, expert witnesses, and any out of pocket expenses incurred. The city may, at any time during the development, require the payment of additional amounts if the city determines that there is insufficient money deposited to cover the costs of completion. At the conclusion of the project, the city will reimburse the developer any excess amounts it has deposited. Under no circumstances shall development of the proposed subdivision continue until all of the required funds have been tendered to the city. 
(4)  Decel/accel lanes. The developer will be required to provide decel/accel lanes at any point that a new subdivision street intersects an existing street. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 502.5)) 
Sec. 114-65. - Lots. 
All lots established in the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived must comply with the development standards contained in this section. However, where provisions of chapter 118 apply and are more strict, those provisions take precedence. Development standards for lots are as follows: 
(1)  Lot lines. As far as practical, side lot lines must be perpendicular or radial street lines. 
(2)  Jurisdictional limits and lot lines. If a lot is divided by city or county boundary lines, the developer will follow the rules and regulations of the jurisdiction within which the majority of the lot lies. 
(3)  Lot frontage arrangements. Land must be subdivided in a manner that provides each lot in the subdivision with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to an approved street contained within the proposed subdivision. Each lot must front for at least 30 feet upon an approved street or road. (See panhandle lots and flag lots.) 
(4)  Adequate building sites. Each lot must contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of existing easements or building setback lines required by this chapter or any existing ordinance as is appropriate. 
(5)  Panhandle or flag lots. Panhandle or flag lots are not allowed. 
(6)  Double or reverse frontage lots. Double and reverse frontage, unless required by the mayor and council, are prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of slope, orientation, or property size. A reserve strip planted with a vegetative screen across which there is no right of access may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use. 
(7)  Commercial and industrial lots. Size, shape, and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted and classified as a subdivision, are subject to the approval of the planning commission. Where possible, minimum lot size and minimum coverage will be based on lot area needed for proper sewage disposal and/or water supply. 
(8)  Lot remnants. Lot remnants are prohibited. Such remnant areas must be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(9)  Monuments. Solid steel rods at least one-half inch in diameter or square and two feet long must be set at all street corners, at all points where street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at angle points in streets, at points of curve in streets, and at points of change of direction in the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. The top of the monument must have an indented cross to identify the finished grade. All other lot corners must be marked with solid steel rods no less than one-half inch in diameter, and at least two feet long, driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(10)  Driveway requirements. Every lot shall be served by a driveway which meets the following criteria: 
a.  For lots with structures located less than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the street from which lot access is obtained, the driveway shall be paved and shall include a paved turn around area. 
b.  For lots with structures located more than 50 feet from the right-of-way of the street from which lot access is obtained, the driveway shall be improved and shall include a designated turn around area. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 503); Res. of 8-16-2005(3), § 1) 
Sec. 114-66. - Utility installations. 
(a)  Easements and widths. 
(1)  Generally. All lots within a subdivision shall provide temporary and permanent easements for stormwater drainage and detention systems; for sanitary sewer installations; for water line installations; and for gas, electric, and telephone utilities. 
(2)  Rear lot line easements. 
a.  A permanent easement of not less than 20 feet in width shall be reserved for the uses described in this section along the length of all rear lot lines. Said easements shall be shown on the final plat together with a short and plain statement that the easements shown are reserved to the city for utility purposes including stormwater drainage and detention system and sewer and water installation purposes. 
b.  An additional easement of not less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the permanent easement shall be reserved during the period of construction or as is reasonably necessary for the proper installation, maintenance and repair of the improvements. 
(3)  Side lot line easements. 
a.  A permanent easement of not less than ten feet in width shall be reserved for the uses described in this section parallel to and along the length of all side lot lines. Said easements shall be shown on the final plat together with a short and plain statement that the easements shown are reserved to the city for utility purposes including stormwater drainage and detention systems. 
b.  An additional easement of not less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the permanent easement shall be reserved during the period of construction or as is reasonably necessary for the proper installation, maintenance and repair of the improvements. 
(4)  Easements along streams and drainageways. 
a.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, on each lot through which said watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream traverses, there shall be provided an easement of undisturbed buffer, in addition to any other easement provided for in this section, of not less than 25 feet measured from the outermost edge of the bank of the watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream contained within the lot for which the easement is required. A wider easement may be required for large streams and drainageways and for future sanitary sewer installations as provided for in this section. 
b.  In a subdivision lot in which a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream forms the rear or side lot line, the easement provided for in subsections (a)(2) and (3) of this section shall be in addition to, and shall be measured from the termination of, the undisturbed buffer easement provided for in subsection (a)(4)a of this section. 
(5)  Sanitary sewer line easements. 
a.  A permanent easement of not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided over, across, under and through each subdivision lot. The easement shall be located to follow the natural contour of the lot so as to obtain maximum gravity flow from the adjacent property across the easement property to the next property. However, this requirement shall not be interpreted to affect residential, commercial, or industrial structures that are placed on the property in the course of development. 
b.  An additional easement of not less than 20 feet in width adjacent to the permanent easement shall be reserved during the period of construction or as is reasonably necessary for the proper installation, maintenance and repair of the sanitary sewer line. 
(6)  Stormwater detention facility easements. All stormwater detention facilities shall be accessible from a public street by an easement of not less than 20 feet in width, and there shall be an additional easement for each detention facility itself, including an area of not less than 20 feet around the outside perimeter of the facility. 
(b)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the underground work within the street right-of-way, water mains, gas mains, etc., must be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. At the same time, all service connections must be stubbed out to each lot. 
(c)  Water supply systems; public water system. When a public water supply is available through the city within one mile of a proposed subdivision, and this supply is of sufficient pressure to adequately provide for the needs of the proposed subdivision, and connection to it is permitted, the subdivider is required to connect to said city public water supply and all mains, fire hydrants, and stub connections to each lot within the subdivision must be provided as shown on approved construction plans and must meet the requirements and development standards of the city. 
(d)  Sanitary sewer disposal systems; public sewerage system. When the city public sewerage system is available within one mile of a proposed subdivision and is of sufficient capacity to adequately provide for the needs of the proposed subdivision, and connection to it is permitted, the subdivider is required to connect to said public sewer system. Sewage mains, and stub connections to each lot within the subdivision must be provided as shown on approved construction plans and must meet the requirements and development standards of the city. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 504)) 
Sec. 114-67. - Street lighting. 
Streetlights shall be provided by the owner/developer in new subdivisions and developments which propose the construction of a new street or along existing streets abutting the subdivision. All fees, materials, labor, poles, fixtures and any other associated items shall be furnished, paid for and installed by the owner/developer. The following standards shall apply: 
(1)  In a residential development, streetlights shall be installed and operating prior to approval of the final plat. In a nonresidential development, streetlights are to be installed and operating prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
(2)  Streetlights shall be spaced in accordance with the following chart: 

 
(3)  A minimum of one streetlight shall be installed at all intersections of subdivision streets and/or subdivision streets and existing streets abutting the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2007-1, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 114-68. - Meter and gas tank placement. 
Electric meter and bottled gas tanks shall be installed and located only on the side or rear of dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 2007-5, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 114-69. - Drainage facilities. 
(a)  Watercourse and drainage easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or stream, appropriate provisions must be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such an easement must conform substantially with the lines of the watercourse and be wide enough and of adequate construction to be satisfactory for the purpose. 
(b)  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., must be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., must be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains must be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and must be long enough to traverse the full width of the roadway and required slopes. All such facilities must be shown in plan and profile, including pipe sizes and invert elevations. Outfall ditching must follow property lines on a 12-foot easement to rear property line or natural drainage course. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 505) 
Sec. 114-70. - Surety for completion of improvements. 
(a)  When allowed. Instead of completing required improvements in a subdivision before seeking approval of the final plat, the subdivider may provide surety for completion of such improvements and proceed with submitting a final plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. The subdivider must then complete the required improvements within the period of performance specified by the government authority or forfeit the surety. 
(b)  Requirements. To assure the construction and installation of required improvements, the subdivider must deliver to the appropriate city authority a certified check, letter of credit, cash escrow, bond (as defined in section 114-38(f)(2)), or other acceptable surety, whichever is specified by the government authority, in the amount estimated by government authority to be the total cost of the construction and installation of the required improvements which are the responsibility of the subdivider. 
(c)  Conditions. Bonds posted or other surety provided must run to the government authority having jurisdiction over the required improvements for which surety is made. The surety must provide that the subdivider, his heirs, successors, agents, and servants will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of these regulations, and with other laws, regulations, and requirements as specified by the appropriate government authority. If bond is offered, it must be executed by a surety and guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. 
(d)  Duration and release. Bonds posted or other surety provided pursuant to these regulations must be released, returned, or otherwise disposed of by the holder at the time facilities guaranteed have been installed and approved. Approval will be in writing and accurately describe the improvements covered. Facilities will not be accepted or approved unless they conform to the specifications and requirements of these regulations and the government authority. 
(e)  Default. The subdivider will be in default of the bond if the construction or installation of any improvements or facilities by the subdivider, for which the bond is posted or other surety is provided, is not completed within the period of performance specified by the public entity at the time the surety is provided or is not completed in accordance with applicable specifications and requirements of the appropriate entity. In such an event, the entity shall notify the subdivider of the default as provided for in the bond giving it the required time to cure the default. If, after such time to cure, the subdivider is still determined to be in default, the entity shall notify the surety in the manner provided for in the bond and have all rights and remedies afforded to it thereto. 
(f)  Certification of receipt of surety for required improvements. A certificate or statement of receipt of surety by the government authority having jurisdiction will be inscribed on or attached to the final plat and executed by the appropriate government authority for the required improvements for which separate surety is provided. 
(Res. of 6-15-2004, § 1(app. A, § 506)) 
Chapter 118 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined here have the same meaning as is found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context. The terms "must," "will" and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "developer" includes a firm, corporation, partnership, association, institution or person. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, includes the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed," "to be used" or "to be occupied." 
Administrative officer means the person, officer, or official, and his authorized representative, whom the mayor and council has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations. 
Agriculture means the raising of soil crops, poultry, and livestock in a customary manner on tracts of land at least three acres in size, including all related buildings, structures, and appurtenances necessary to carry out all associated activities. Retail selling of products raised on the premises is permitted provided that space necessary for the parking of customers' vehicles is provided off the public right-of-way. 
Airport means a transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land. 
Alley means a secondary way which affords access to the side or rear of abutting property. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, any modification or change in construction, any addition which increases the area or height, any change in use from that of one district classification to another, or movement of a building from one location to another. 
Antenna, dish, means a structure intended for receiving audio or video signals via a satellite orbiting the earth. It is constructed of a round or square surface which is focusing on a low-noise signal amplifier and the apparatus is mounted on a base. Such antennas must meet the following development standards as well as all other applicable regulations. They must not exceed a size of 18 feet in diameter or 20 feet above the surface upon which the base is affixed. 
Automobile service station means a land use where gasoline, oils, greases, batteries, tires, and general automobile accessories may be provided, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Board of appeals means: 
(1)  With reference to appeals from decisions of the administrative officer or planning commission, the mayor and council. 
(2)  With reference to requests for variances, the mayor and council. 
(3)  With reference to requests for special exceptions, the mayor and council. 
Boardinghouse or roominghouse means a building used or intended for use as a place for lodging or feeding or both, of three or more persons, for compensation. 
Buffer means that portion of a lot established for open space purposes and intended to separate properties with different and possibly incompatible types of uses. A buffer shall not be occupied with structures. A buffer shall remain undisturbed from its natural predevelopment vegetative state. Encroachment of a buffer, as needed for construction, may be authorized by obtaining written consent of the administrative officer. Where encroachment of a buffer is allowed, vegetation disturbance shall be kept to the minimum required for the installation and vegetation that is removed shall be replaced with suitable landscape material that provides the same quality of screening. A buffer may be incorporated into the yard setback as specified in the appropriate zoning district. Where any buffer encroaches upon the boundaries of any lot, developer shall reserve such permanent easements as are necessary for reservation of the right to access all buffers for maintenance purposes. Where required by this chapter or as a condition of zoning imposed by the mayor and council, a buffer must include the installation of a suitable visual screen in accordance with the provisions contained in article IV of this chapter. 
Building means any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building, accessory, means a structure used for a purpose that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and located on the same lot as such a principal use or structure. 
Building, principal, means the building on a lot in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Building height means the vertical distance of a building, measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Building line means the line which represents the distance a building must be set back from the boundary line of a lot, measured at the foundation of the building. 
Cemetery means land either already reserved for burial plots for the deceased, or which may, in the future, be so reserved; it may be maintained either by a family, a church or other place of worship, or a private corporation. 
Centerline, street, means that line surveyed and marked by the city as the centerline of a street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it is the line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Clinic means an establishment where medical or dental patients are admitted for examination and treatment, but where there is no overnight lodging. 
Club or lodge means an incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreation, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Conventional construction means a dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site; and which is constructed in accordance with the state building code. 
Curb cut means the point at which vehicular access is provided to an adjoining street from a lot. 
DCA means the state department of community affairs. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per acre of land use for residential purposes. Unless otherwise stated, density figures are to be in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets or other public lands. 
Developer means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same under this chapter. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged, or used principally for residential occupancy, not including motels, hotels, boardinghouses, or roominghouses. 
Dwelling, apartment, means one or more dwelling units, under a single ownership, located on one lot of land, occupied by renters. 
Dwelling, cluster, means one of a series of attached dwelling units developed under a single ownership. 
Dwelling, condominium, means an individually owned dwelling unit in an attached, detached, or multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the buildings and grounds. 
Dwelling, garden apartment, means a multifamily dwelling one or two stories in height containing from two to four dwelling units, and where the area immediately surrounding the dwelling landscaped and may contain recreation facilities for the private use of dwelling occupants. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building designed, constructed, altered or used for five or more adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or walls and/or a party floor and ceiling connecting it with at least one other dwelling unit located on one lot of land. A multiple-family dwelling may be apartments or condominiums. 
Dwelling, patio, means an attached single-family dwelling in which all or a portion of the area required for side and rear yards may be consolidated into one or more garden court spaces within the walls of the dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family attached, means a building containing two or more single-family dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or other common facilities (not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area) and with property lines separating each dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, means a single residential detached building designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, townhouse, means one of a series of three or more attached dwelling units on separate lots which are separated from each other by firewalls extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached dwelling designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall connecting it with the other dwelling unit, located on one lot; also known as a duplex. 
Dwelling unit means a structure or a portion of any structure designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels, motels, boardinghouses or like uses. 
Easement means the right or privilege of using another's property, for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways, and other purposes. 
Elevation, front, means the view of a building or group of building as seen from directly in front of the structure. 
Employee, fulltime, means a person who works at least 40 hours per week for one employer. 
Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, including up to three additional unrelated individuals, occupying a dwelling unit. A family may also consist of no more than four unrelated individuals. 
Farm means any tract or parcel of land containing three or more acres which is devoted to the raising of agricultural products, including, but not limited to, soil crops, livestock, fish, fowl, and commercial timber regardless of the quantity or value of production. 
Floor area means the area of a dwelling exclusive of attic, basement, garage, carport, patios, and open porches measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a dwelling. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
Garage, public, means any garage, other than a private garage, which is used for storage, minor repair, rental, servicing, washing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles, but not including the storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Garage, repair, means a public garage intended to be used to make major commercial automobile, motorcycle, lawn mower, or other motor vehicle repairs; such a use should meet the following development standards as well as all other applicable regulations: 
(1)  All body work and painting must be conducted within a fully enclosed building. 
(2)  No open storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, or supplies visible beyond the premises is permitted. 
Garage or carport, private, means a covered space for the storage of one or more motor vehicles belonging to the occupants of the principal use on the lot. No business occupation or service may be conducted for profit within the private garage except a home occupation under conditions specified in this section. 
Home occupation means an occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the principal dwelling. The following required development standards must be met by all home occupations: 
(1)  Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(2)  The home occupation must be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and must not change the essentially residential character of the building. 
(3)  No display of products may be visible from the street. 
(4)  Use of the building for this purpose may not exceed 25 percent of the principal building. 
(5)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building are permitted. 
(6)  No accessory buildings or outside storage may be used in connection with the home occupation except a private garage. 
(7)  Only vehicles designed and used primarily as passenger vehicles (this includes light pickup trucks) may be used in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. 
Hotel means a building in which overnight accommodations are provided to the public. The term "hotel" includes the terms "motel" and "tourist court." 
HUD means the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof, which is, wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with applicable state law. 
Industrialized home means a home manufactured in accordance with the rules of the commissioner of the state department of community affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the state building and construction codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner. 
Institution means a nonprofit corporation, establishment, or entity; for public or semipublic use. 
Intermediate care home means a facility which admits residents on medical referral. It maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in chapter 290-5-9: Intermediate Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or nonoperable automobile, truck, or other vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Junkyard means any use involving the parking, storage or disassembly of junked vehicles, or wrecked or nonoperable automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles; storage, baling, or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap iron and other metals, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, old refrigerators, and other old household appliances, and used brick, wood, or other building materials. These uses are considered junkyards whether or not all or part of these operations are conducted inside a building or in connection with, in addition to, or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Kennel means the housing for four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing an income or revenue. 
Loading space means space logically and conveniently located for pickup and delivery service, scaled to the vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles at all time. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings and customarily incidental accessory buildings or uses, including such open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. If a corner lot, the distance between lot lines measured along the front building line which parallels or more nearly parallels the rear lot line. 
Manufactured home, Class A, means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Home and Standards Act, 42 USC 5401—5445 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the following development standards: 
(1)  The home has a minimum width in excess of 16 feet and a 24-foot width. 
(2)  The roof shall have a minimum 4:12 pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials, or other materials approved by the building official. 
(3)  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap or other materials of like appearance. 
(4)  The manufactured home must be placed on a permanent foundation. In addition, a permanent curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, and constructed of either masonry, rock or brick and is installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. 
(5)  The tongues, axles, transporting lights, and towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
(6)  At each exterior door there must be a landing that is a minimum of three feet by four feet. 
All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with state-mandated codes. Class A manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. 
Manufactured home space means an area of land within a planned manufactured home community designed to accommodate one manufactured home. 
Manufactured housing means a general term used to describe a type of housing which is produced, either completely or partially in a factory, including manufactured homes, modular homes, and industrialized homes. In the context of this chapter, this term has no specific meaning. 
Modular home means a factory-fabricated single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of Industrialized home. 
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards means the national building code for all manufactured homes built since June 15, 1976, written and administered by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development; also known as the HUD Code. 
Nursing home means a facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision. It maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in chapter 290-5-8: Nursing Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). 
Official map means the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City Of Milner, Georgia," indicating the locations of zoning district boundaries in the city. 
Parking space means the storage space for one motor vehicle. (See Standard Building Code of SBCCI for dimension standards required of standard parking spaces and those accessible to handicapped persons.) 
Personal care home means a building or group of buildings, a facility, or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including rooms, meals, and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults. It otherwise complies with the rules and regulations contained in chapter 290-5-35: Personal Care Homes (Rules of the Georgia Department of Human Resources). For the purpose of this chapter, personal care homes are classified as follows: 
(1)  Family personal care home. A home for adults in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care of two through six persons. 
(2)  Group personal care home. A home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, noninstitutional in character, which offers care of seven through 15 persons. 
(3)  Congregate personal care home. A home for adults which offers care of 16 or more persons. 
Planned apartment home community means a lot used or intended for use as a residential area occupied by apartment homes and conforming to an approved development plan; with appropriate and adequate community services, recreation facilities, utilities, streets, and sidewalks provided by the developer. 
Planned manufactured home community means a lot used or intended for use as a residential area occupied by manufactured homes; and conforming to an approved development plan with appropriate and adequate community services, recreation facilities, utilities, and streets provided by the developer; where the resident owns or rents the manufactured home and rents the manufactured home space. All manufactured home parks must be designed and constructed in accordance with ANSI A225.1 (NFPA 501A), the contents of which are incorporated herein by reference. 
Plat means a map, plan, or layout of a county, city, town, section, or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Prefabricated home means a general term used to describe any home constructed in a factory setting including manufactured homes, modular homes, and industrialized homes. In the context of this chapter, this term has no specific meaning. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land designed, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
SBCCI means the Southern Building Code Congress International. 
Sectional home means a general term used to describe any home constructed in a factory setting, especially manufactured homes. In the context of this chapter, this term has no specific meaning. 
Story means that portion of a building, not including a basement, between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected that requires a fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site built buildings, industrialized buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes, and fallout shelters. 
Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot of record at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived into three or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. This definition includes all of the following: 
(1)  All divisions of land involving a new street. 
(2)  All divisions of land involving a change in existing streets. 
(3)  Any resubdivision of land. 
(4)  The process of subdividing. 
(5)  Any land or area subdivided. 
Substation means an electrical utility substation. 
Travel trailer means a vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational uses, not more than eight feet in width and not more than 30 feet in length. 
Travel trailer park means a lot on which are parked two or more travel trailers for a period of less than 30 days. 
Use means any purpose for which a building or tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or structure or a tract of land. 
Use, accessory, means a use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and located on the same lot as the principal use or structure. 
Use, conditional, means a use which is permitted in a particular zoning district, but only under certain specified conditions. 
Use, nonconforming, means a use of land and/or buildings that does not conform to the regulations and standards of the district in which it is located, which lawfully existed at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and is allowed to continue under the provisions for nonconforming uses (see section 118-37). 
Use, principal, means the main purpose for which a lot is intended and for which it is used. 
Variance means a permit issued by the board of appeals which allows the use of a parcel of land in a way that does not meet certain requirements for the district in which the property is located. See section 118-32 for further details. 
Yard means a required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted in this chapter. A yard may also be known as a setback. 
Yard, front, means the open space on a lot located between the centerline of the right-of-way boundary of the abutting street and the front building line projected to the side lot lines. 
Yard, rear, means the open space between the rear property line and the rear building line projected to the side lot lines. 
Yard, side, means the open space between the side property line and the side building line extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning district means one or more sections of the city as delineated and designated on the official map, within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, §§ 201—203; Res. of 7-19-2005, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2007-6, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter seeks to encourage the development of desirable land use patterns within the city in accordance with the city land use plan. The promotion of sound land use patterns is intended to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of certain conditions which can threaten the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. This chapter should serve the following purposes: 
(1)  Reduce the occurrence of hazardous traffic patterns and general congestion. 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers. 
(3)  Assure that adequate light and air are provided. 
(4)  Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population. 
(5)  Facilitate the adequate provision of public utilities and facilities. 
(6)  Promote adequate living conditions and sustained suitability of neighborhoods. 
(7)  Protect property against blight and depreciation. 
(8)  Promote health, safety, morals, convenience, aesthetics and general welfare. 
(b)  Additional benefits to the public interest which can accrue from the development of sound land use patterns are as follows: 
(1)  Efficient development and use of community utility networks. 
(2)  Economy in governmental expenditures. 
(3)  A higher level of convenience, order, prosperity, and aesthetics. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 104) 
Sec. 118-3. - Violation. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such a violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 412) 
Sec. 118-4. - Compliance required. 
(a)  No building is to be erected, used, occupied, moved, or altered in a manner that does not conform to the requirements specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  The only exception to this requirement is that all buildings or uses which lawfully existed at a particular location at the time the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted may be continued as nonconforming uses. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 402) 
Sec. 118-5. - Amendments. 
(a)  Any citizen of the city, the planning commission, or the city may propose an amendment of the text of this chapter, pursuant to the provisions in this section. In addition, the planning commission or the board of appeals may propose an amendment to the official zoning map. 
(b)  If a developer or landowner finds that a proposed new use of his land does not meet the requirements of this chapter, he may request that this chapter be amended to permit his proposed use. The developer or owner wishing to request an amendment of the official map must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing under the owner's signature. The administrative officer or the mayor and council may also propose an amendment. However, the power to approve and enact an amendment rests with the mayor and council. 
(c)  Application for an amendment may be made with the administrative officer. The administrative officer will take the required information and transmit it to the mayor and council for its consideration. No application is to be accepted from any person in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for an amendment or any other action by the planning commission is, at the time of such an application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  He must be tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of charges and present a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(d)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for amendment with the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Current provision of the text to be attached by the amendment; 
(3)  Proposed wording of the text change; 
(4)  Reason for the proposed amendment. 
(e)  When an amendment is initiated by anyone other than the mayor and council, which amendment involves changing the zoning district of a parcel of land, the administrative officer must post a sign at least two feet by three feet in size in a conspicuous place on the property at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. The sign must set forth the fact that it is a public hearing. It must show the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, the date, time, and place of the scheduled public hearing. A notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing. Contents of the notice shall include the following: location of the property, present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, and the date, time and place of the public hearing. (Note: This public hearing will be conducted by the mayor and council.) 
(f)  All applications for amendment must first be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission and the mayor and council will study the proposed amendment and determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, as well as other applicable ordinances of the city. At this time, the administrative officer may review the proposed amendment and make written recommendations to the planning commission. 
(g)  The planning commission will, when considering a proposed amendment to this chapter, consider the following standards: 
(1)  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property, including the impact of the proposed amendment. 
(2)  The suitability of the property for the zoned purpose. 
(3)  The length of time the property has been vacant. 
(4)  The threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if rezoned. 
(5)  The extent to which the value of the property is diminished by the present zoning. 
(6)  The balance between the hardship on the property owner and the benefit to the public in not rezoning. 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of any land use plan. 
(h)  The planning commission may also consider whether development of the property in the zoning classification sought would do any of the following: 
(1)  Have an adverse effect on the insurance rating of the city, or any substantial portion of the city, issued by the insurance service officer or similar rating agency. 
(2)  Overtax the public utilities and streets presently existing to serve the site. 
(3)  Have a substantial adverse impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity. 
(i)  The planning commission will formulate its recommendations to the mayor and council, recording them in the minutes for that meeting. The planning commission will send the recommendations on the proposed amendment in writing to the mayor and council within 30 days of the close of the planning commission meeting, in lieu of which the planning commission will have been deemed to approve the amendment. 
(j)  After receiving the record of the planning commission recommendations, the mayor and council will then hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The decision may or may not concur with the recommendations of the planning commission. 
(k)  The following policies and procedures will be observed in conducting the required public hearing. (Note: the public hearing reference herein shall refer to the publicized hearing conducted by the city, but to the extent the public attends any hearing conducted by the planning commission, these procedures shall likewise apply.) 
(1)  The hearing will be held in the city council room. All persons who wish to address the planning commission or the mayor and council at a hearing shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the hearing body prior to the commencement of the hearing. Any party who wishes to address the mayor and council through his attorney or other designated representative or agent, that party's attorney or other designated representative or agent shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the hearing body prior to the commencement of the hearing setting forth the name of the principal and the capacity in which they are appearing, i.e., whether as attorney, parent, attorney in fact, real estate agent, or otherwise identified. 
(2)  The planning commission or the mayor and council will cause to be read the proposed zoning decisions under consideration and any departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input. Proposed zoning decisions shall, as a general rule, be called in the order in which they are received provided nothing shall prevent the mayor and council from changing the order of decisions reviewed at the time of hearing for the convenience of the planning commission or the mayor and council and the public. 
(3)  The planning commission or the mayor and council shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the proposed zoning decision in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except for amendments by the applicant, who will always speak first, or if the hearing body is bringing a proposed zoning decision to the hearing, then the hearing body shall speak first; provided, however, no person shall be allowed to speak in addition to his attorney or their designated representative or agent. Each person shall have only one opportunity and time limit in which to speak and said opportunity and time shall be used only by the person or the person's attorney or other designated representative or agent. The purpose of this is to disallow additional time, not allowed to other speakers, by use of attorneys, representatives, and agents, thereby gaining an unfair advantage at the hearing. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself and state his current address, and if an attorney, or other designated representative or agent, identify his principal. Only those persons signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless the mayor and council, in their discretion, vote to make an exception at the time of the hearing, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(4)  The length of time of oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be determined by the mayor and will depend upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak. 
(5)  Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decisions under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the mayor and council. The merits of the proposed zoning decision shall include evidence or opinions regarding devaluation, fair market value, nuisance, environmental concerns, traffic, noise, aesthetics and in general, the health, welfare and benefit of the community or county as they are affected by the proposed zoning decision. The speaker shall refrain from commenting on unrelated zoning issues and unrelated tracts of land. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposal under consideration. The planning commission or the mayor and council may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. 
(6)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the hearing body from taking reasonable steps necessary to ensure that hearing are conducted in a decorous manner, to assure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(7)  Prior to the close of the hearing, the planning commission or the mayor and council shall announce whether it will vote on the policies and procedures at that same hearing or whether it will defer its vote for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(l)  After reviewing the record of the public hearing and considering recommendations from the planning commission and applying the criteria set forth in subsection (g) of this section, the mayor and council may approve or deny the proposed amendment, reduce the land area for which the amendment is requested, change the district or land use category requested, or impose conditions which may restrict the use or development of the property in a manner not otherwise required by this chapter. Any such conditions imposed by the mayor and council shall be incorporated into this chapter and shall become a part of the official zoning map, whether or not actually entered upon the official zoning map. 
(m)  If the mayor and council denies a proposed amendment, a minimum period of 12 months must pass before the same amendment proposal is again submitted for consideration. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 410; Res. of 11-15-2005, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Sec. 118-6. - References to official zoning map. 
Any reference in this chapter to the "Official Zoning Map, City of Milner, Georgia," or the "official map," is a reference to the zoning map, attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and is available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 118-7—118-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 118-29. - Initial information. 
The administrative officer will show the developer a copy of this chapter. The developer may either review the document in the office or he may purchase a copy for his own use. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 401) 
Sec. 118-30. - Appealing an action of the mayor and council. 
If the mayor and council executes an action which the developer or other aggrieved party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed to the county superior court. Findings of fact, however, may not be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action of the mayor and council was taken. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 411) 
Sec. 118-31. - Appealing an action of the administrative officer or planning commission. 
(a)  If the administrative officer or planning commission executes an action which the developer or other aggrieved party believes to be contrary to law, that action may be appealed. Findings of fact, however, may not be appealed. Such an appeal must be filed within 30 days of the date on which the action by the administrative officer was taken. 
(b)  The board of appeals has jurisdiction for hearing appeals concerning actions of the administrative officer related to this chapter. Applications for appeal may be obtained from and submitted to the administrative officer, who will transmit them to the board of appeals for its consideration. 
(c)  When an action of the administrative officer or planning commission is appealed, all construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action must be stopped immediately. In certain cases, however, the administrative officer may feel that the stopping of such construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action will cause imminent peril to life or property. The administrative officer may certify to the board of appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, the halting of construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, the construction or other activity authorized by the appealed action is allowed to continue unless a restraining order is granted by either the board of appeals or a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(d)  When an application for appeal of an action of the administrative officer is received, the board of appeals will set a time and place for a public hearing on the appeal. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the parties to the appeal will be notified of the date of the hearing by the board of appeals by U. S. mail at least 15 days before the hearing. Any person may appear at the hearing, or have a representative attend instead. 
(e)  The board of appeals will make a decision concerning the appeal and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. Further appeal on points of law may be made to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 406) 
Sec. 118-32. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance is a permit, issued by the board of appeals, which allows use of a parcel of land in a way that does not meet certain requirements for the district in which the property is located. A variance may be granted only in an individual case where an extreme hardship would result if all of the requirements of this chapter were applied stringently to a particular piece of property. The hardship must be proven by showing beyond a doubt that reasonable use of the land is not possible if all of the requirements of this chapter are to be met. The hardship cannot be self-created such as: 
(1)  A lot purchased with knowledge of an existing restriction. 
(2)  A claim of hardship in terms of prospective sales. 
(3)  An expressed economic need requiring a variance, when such a need can be met in other ways which would not require a variance. 
(b)  Relief from the hardship, the variance, must not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  When a variance is issued, the spirit of this chapter must be observed and the public safety and welfare secured. A variance may be granted only for permitted uses in the zoning district in which the property in question is located (for example, a two-family dwelling would not be allowed to be placed in an R-1 district under a variance). 
(d)  The developer or owner wishing to request a variance must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing, under the owner's signature. The planning commission or the mayor and council may also propose a variance. However, the power to approve a variance rests with the board of appeals. 
(e)  Application for a variance may be made with the administrative officer. The administrative officer will take the required information and transmit it to the board of appeals for its consideration. No application is to be accepted from any person in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for a variance or any other action by the board of appeals is, at the time of such application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  Has been tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of charges and presents a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(f)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (e)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for variance. 
(g)  When an application for a variance is received, the board of appeals will set a time and place for a public hearing on the variance. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days before the hearing. Such notice will state the application number, owner's name, property location, its area, time, place and subject of the hearing. At least 15 days before the public hearing, notice of the time, place, and subject of the hearing will be sent to the appellant or petitioner and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property in writing by U.S. mail. Copies of all such letters will be maintained in the applicant file for permanent record. 
(h)  The board of appeals will make a decision concerning the variance and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. 
(i)  The variance issued by the board of appeals must specify which requirements are to be varied from. It must specify alternative requirements to be met, replacing the requirements varied from. 
(j)  The board of appeals may establish performance bonds to assure compliance with any requirements it has set for granting a variance. Where a variance is granted for a construction activity requiring a building permit, the building permit must be obtained and construction must begin within six months of the issuance of the variance. Otherwise, the variance expires after six months. 
(k)  The decision of the board of appeals on the application for variance may be appealed on points of law to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 407) 
Sec. 118-33. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  When a parcel of property is placed in a certain zoning district, all permitted uses for that zoning district are allowed on the property as long as the published requirements of this chapter and other development regulations of the city are met. However, in certain situations, only one of the permitted uses for a district may be appropriate for a parcel of property while many of the other uses within the range of those permitted would not be appropriate, or certain design, location, aesthetic, or other standards may be needed to mask otherwise undesirable effects of a permitted use. In such cases, conditional zoning may be granted by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The following situations are permitted under conditional zoning: 
(1)  The use of land may be specifically limited to any one or more of the permitted uses for the zoning district in which the land is placed. 
(2)  Special requirements of design, location, aesthetics, or other considerations may be imposed for the uses permitted on the land. 
(3)  Any combination of the two categories of conditions in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section may be imposed. 
(c)  Conditional zoning is attached to a specific lot or group of lots, not to the owner. If ownership of the lot changes, continued compliance with the special conditions must be maintained by the new owner. 
(d)  Conditional zoning may be proposed by the mayor and council, the planning commission, the petitioner for a zoning amendment, or any person who may be affected by the subject property. 
(e)  A tract of land to which special conditions have been attached continues to be subject to all other requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations of the city which are not in conflict with those special conditions. 
(f)  Whenever a tract of land has had special conditions imposed upon it and a building permit is applied for, plans and specifications which are drawn in compliance with the special conditions must be submitted with the application for a permit. 
(g)  Three sets of plans and specifications must be submitted to the administrative officer in application for a building permit. Upon approval, the administrative officer will certify in writing his approval upon the plans and specifications. The copies of the approved plans and specifications will be distributed as follows: 
(1)  One copy to the record of rezoning file. 
(2)  One copy to the administrative officer. 
(3)  One copy to the applicant. 
(h)  When conditional zoning has been granted for a parcel of property, and no building permit for the property has been applied for within 12 months of the date of such conditional zoning, the property will revert to its original zoning prior to the conditional zoning. However, the owner of the property conditionally zoned may request the mayor and council to extend the conditional zoning for up to 12 months. If the mayor and council find just cause for extending the conditional zoning, it may be extended for a period of up to 12 months. 
(i)  The zoning of any parcel of land which is subject to special conditions will be indicated on the official map by its zoning district designation followed by "C" (for example, R-1-C). 
(j)  Any granting of conditional zoning is an amendment of this chapter, and procedures contained in section 118-5 must be followed. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 408) 
Sec. 118-34. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Some zoning districts permit certain uses only upon approval of the mayor and city council following preliminary review by the planning commission. These uses are identified in this chapter as special exceptions and in each case carry specific circumstances under which the use should or should not be allowed. 
(b)  The developer or owner wishing to request a special exception must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property or be the duly authorized agent of such a person, possessing notarized authorization in writing, under the owner's signature. The planning commission or mayor and city council may also propose a special exception. However, the power to approve a special exception rests with the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Application for a special exception may be made with the administrative officer. The administrative officer will take the required information and transmit it to the mayor and city council for its consideration. No application is to be accepted from any person in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for special exception or any other action by the mayor and city council is, at the time of such an application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant voluntarily removes or changes the cause of the violation and ceases to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(d)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation of this chapter, the administrative officer will then accept the application for special exception. 
(e)  When an application for a special exception is received, the mayor and city council will set a time and place for a public hearing on the special exception. Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days before the hearing. Such a notice will state the application number, owner's name, property location, its area, time, place, and subject of the hearing. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice of the time, place, and subject of the hearing will be sent to the applicant and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property in writing by U.S. mail. Copies of all such letters will be maintained in the applicant's file for permanent record. 
(f)  All applications for a special exception must first be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission will study the proposed special exception and determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, as well as other applicable ordinances of the city. At this time, the administrative officer may review the proposed special exception and make written recommendations to the planning commission. 
(g)  The planning commission will consider the following points in arriving at a recommendation on the special exception: 
(1)  It must not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties, or to the general neighborhood; it must not adversely affect the health or safety of residents or workers. 
(2)  It must not be that any possible depreciating effects and damages to the neighboring properties are greater than the benefits or need for the special exception. 
(3)  It must not adversely affect existing uses, and it must be proposed to be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of the use. 
(4)  It must not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such a facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generated, or type of physical activity. 
(5)  It must meet all other requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  The planning commission will make a written record of its findings along with its recommendations on the proposed special exception and forward a copy of its findings and recommendations to the mayor and city council within 60 days of the date on which the proposed special exception application was received by the administrative officer. 
(i)  The mayor and city council must then conduct a public hearing on the special exception. 
(j)  The following policies and procedures will be observed in conducting the required public hearing: 
(1)  The hearing will be held in the city council room. All persons who wish to address the mayor and city council at a hearing shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the hearing body prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(2)  The mayor and city council will cause to be read the proposed zoning decisions under consideration and any departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input. 
(3)  The mayor and city council shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the proposed zoning decision in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except for the applicant, who will always speak first, or of the hearing body is bringing a proposed zoning decision to the hearing, then the hearing body shall speak first. Only those persons signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless the mayor and city council, in their discretion, vote to make an exception at the time of the hearing, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(4)  The length of time for oral presentations permitted to each speaker will be determined by the mayor and will depend upon the number of persons present and desiring to speak. 
(k)  After reviewing the record of the public hearing and considering the recommendations of the planning commission, the mayor and city council, applying the criteria set forth in subsection (g) of this section, as applicable, may approve or deny the requested special exception, or impose conditions which may restrict the use or development of the special exception use in a manner not otherwise required by this chapter. 
(l)  If the mayor and city council denies a proposed special exception, a minimum period of 12 months must pass before the same special exception proposal is again submitted for consideration. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 409; Ord. of 4-19-2006(1), § 1) 
Sec. 118-35. - Building permit required. 
(a)  The developer or other person wishing to do any of the following must first apply to the administrative officer for a building permit: 
(1)  Excavation or filling of a lot for the construction of a building. 
(2)  Erection, movement, extension, or enlargement of a building. 
(3)  Work on an existing building which entails structural change. 
(4)  Installation of a manufactured home. 
(5)  Building or modifying any electrical service. 
(b)  No electricity, water, or sewage hookup will be made available to the site of new construction until a building permit is secured. 
(c)  The building permit must be applied for either by the owner of the land upon which the proposed building or alteration is to be located, or by the contractor doing the work. 
(d)  The applicant may obtain a building permit application from the administrative officer. He should complete the application form and submit it to the administrative officer, together with any supporting documentation which the administrative officer may specify. 
(e)  No application will be accepted from any person who is in violation of this chapter. If an applicant for a building permit is, at the time of such an application, determined by the administrative officer to be in violation of this chapter, then the administrative officer will be prohibited from accepting or processing any application from that applicant until the applicant does one of the following: 
(1)  He must voluntarily remove or change the cause of the violation and cease to be in violation. The applicant must notify the administrative officer that he has ceased the violation and obtain a release from the administrative officer as to the violation. 
(2)  He must be tried before a court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted of charges and present a certified copy of the court order to the administrative officer within 30 days of the final order of the court. 
(f)  When the applicant has ceased to be in violation by either subsection (e)(1) or (2) of this section, the administrative officer will then accept the application for building permit. 
(g)  Before a building permit is issued by the administrative officer, the county health department must approve the sewage disposal facilities required in connection with the proposed building or structure. In areas served by a public water and sewerage system, the health department may elect to waive the requirement for approval. After a study of the site of a proposed use, the health department may require for health reasons that all or any portion of the site not be used for the intended purpose. The health department may also set a minimum lot size larger than that required by this chapter. The city will either approve or disapprove the water and sewer facilities within 30 days of receipt of the application from the administrative officer, providing a written decision, including reasons for the decision. 
(h)  An existing use which is altered or extended must meet applicable city building codes and development regulations. When an applicant seeks a building permit for the extension or alteration of an existing use, the administrative officer will inspect the use and determine what (if anything) is needed to bring the use into conformance with applicable building codes and development regulations before a building permit may be issued. 
(i)  The administrative officer is in charge of issuing building permits. The administrative officer will contact the applicant at the address shown on the application. The building permit will be issued if, upon review of the application and inspection of the site, the administrative officer is satisfied that the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances. The administrative officer may require the submission of additional materials if he concludes additional information is needed in order to determine if the proposed project meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(j)  If the administrative officer feels that the proposed project as presented in the building permit application will not satisfy the requirements of this chapter, he will not issue a building permit. He will notify the applicant in writing within ten days of the submission of the application, stating reasons for the refusal. The applicant will then need to confer with the administrative officer to determine what he needs to do in order to comply with the ordinance and be eligible for a building permit. 
(k)  Construction on an approved project must start within six months from the date of issue of the building permit, or the permit will become invalid and a new one must be applied for if construction of the project is desired at a future date. If construction has begun on an approved project and then ceases before the project is completed, construction must be restarted within 12 months from the time that it was stopped, or the permit will become invalid and a new one must be applied for if construction of the project is desired to resume at a future date. Records of building permit applications and supporting materials will be maintained by the administrative officer. 
(l)  All newly constructed buildings, as well as additions, extensions, or enlargements of structures must comply with all building codes in effect in the city. The administrative officer will explain the procedures and timing of inspections to determine if work meets applicable codes. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 404) 
Sec. 118-36. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy is required before a structure, for which a building permit has been issued, may be occupied or used. The building permit becomes the certificate of occupancy when the administrative officer signs it in the appropriate space, certifying that to the best of his knowledge all requirements of this chapter have been met. The owner/contractor will then receive the certificate of occupancy to be used as confirmation that he has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The administrative officer will issue the certificate of occupancy within ten days of receiving the building permit with required certifications, if he finds that all requirements of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances have been met. However, if he finds that all requirements of such ordinances have not yet been met when the owner/contractor seeks a certificate of occupancy, the administrative officer will not issue the certificate of occupancy. He will notify the owner/contractor within ten days, stating reasons for the refusal. The owner/contractor will then need to confer with the administrative officer to determine what he needs to do in order to comply with this chapter and be eligible for a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 405) 
Sec. 118-37. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
Invariably, at the time a land use and development control ordinance is adopted or amended, certain uses which lawfully existed prior to the adoption or amendment will not conform to the regulations and standards for the districts in which they are located. These are known as nonconforming uses, and in order to feasibly adopt the ordinance and so as not to cause undue economic hardship on owners of nonconforming uses, these uses are allowed to continue under special conditions as outlined in the following parts of this section: 
(1)  Where a nonconforming use of a building or lot has ceased for more than six months or has changed to a permitted or conforming use, further use of the building or lot must be in conformance with the standards and requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  A nonconforming use must not be extended or altered unless the extension or alteration is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  A nonconforming use which is altered or extended must meet applicable city building codes and development regulations. When an applicant seeks a building permit for the extension or alteration of a nonconforming use, the administrative officer will inspect the unit and determine what (if anything) is needed to bring the unit into conformance with applicable building codes and development regulations. Upon determining that the unit meets applicable building codes and development regulations, he will issue the building permit for the nonconforming use. 
(4)  If a nonconforming building or structure suffers damage which does not exceed 50 percent of its assessed valuation, the building or structure may be reconstructed and reused as before if done within 12 months from the time such damage occurred. If such damage is greater than 50 percent of its assessed valuation, such a building or structure may only be reconstructed and used in conformity with the standards and requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(5)  A use which is nonconforming only with respect to screening or buffer requirements must provide required screens or buffers within a period of three years from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. This time period is to allow for the growth of natural vegetative buffers. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 403) 
Sec. 118-38. - Powers and duties of the administrative officer. 
The administrative officer has the power and duty to provide the following services related to this chapter: 
(1)  Provide initial information about this chapter upon request. 
(2)  Advise how to contact members of the mayor and council, or other officials as may be appropriate for services provided by those bodies or officials. 
(3)  Maintain the official map on public display. 
(4)  Determine in which zoning district a parcel of land lies. 
(5)  Issue building permits under the procedures outlined in section 118-35. 
(6)  Issue certificates of occupancy under the procedures outlined in section 118-36. 
(7)  Offer practical suggestions on how to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  Maintain complete records concerning this chapter and related matters, and make such records available to the public upon request. 
(9)  Supervise all professional and clerical personnel employed in connection with the performance of the functions of the administrative officer. 
(10)  Serve as administrative secretary to the mayor and council. 
(11)  Issue certificates of zoning compliance for all permitted uses as well as for variances or other applicable procedures which are granted. 
(12)  Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices, in order that he may be qualified to make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning amendments to this chapter. 
(13)  Research and make reference to this chapter in connection with each and every application received for variance or other applicable procedures and to make written recommendations to the mayor and council on each such application as to whether: 
a.  The granting of such variance or other applicable procedures would result in an encroachment on existing land uses or zoning districts already established on adjoining or nearby neighborhood properties protected by this chapter from such adverse impact. 
b.  Sufficient authority exists in this chapter to allow the mayor and council to grant the variance or other applicable procedures. 
(14)  Maintain all written recommendations to other officials of the city in the application file to which each pertains. 
(15)  Set off-street parking requirements for certain land uses as necessary, according to procedures contained in the City Of Milner Standard for Off-Street Parking and Service Facilities (Appendix I), attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(16)  Implement any other policy as deemed necessary by the mayor and council under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2403) 
Sec. 118-39. - Application filing fees. 
Each application for rezoning, variance or special exception shall be accompanied by a $250.00 filing fee. 
(Ord. No. 2008-4, § 1, 2-25-08) 
Secs. 118-40—118-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 

Sec. 118-65. - Districts established. 
(a)  Generally. For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into the following districts: 

 
(b)  Overlay districts. In addition, overlay districts apply additional standards to specific areas which may lie within any of the districts in subsection (a) of this section. Those districts are as follows: S-2, sensitive land-watershed protection. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 301; Res. of 7-19-2005, § 3; Res. of 5-17-2005, § 1; Ord. No. 2007-2, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-66. - Districts explained. 
(a)  Districts are areas of land within the city to which different development requirements and standards are applied. These differences are intended to promote the separation of incompatible uses, encourage sound land use patterns, and retain the character of the community. Although this chapter establishes the locations of district boundaries, as indicated on the official map, the boundaries may be amended in the future in order to meet changing needs if facts are presented and accepted in support of such an amendment. 
(b)  This may be done, however, only if the proposed change is in conformance with the city land use plan. (This does not necessarily mean a one-to-one correspondence.) If conditions have changed to the point that a genuinely needed change in a district boundary is not in conformance with the city land use plan, then the city land use plan must first be amended to address the changing needs. 
(c)  In making the decision to amend the boundary of a district, the points contained in section 118-5 must be considered by the planning commission as well as the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 302) 
Sec. 118-67. - Official zoning map. 
The Official Zoning Map, City Of Milner, Georgia, is hereby designated to be this section. Any reference to the "official map" in this chapter refers to the Official Zoning Map, City Of Milner, Georgia. On November 9, 2011, the "Zoning Map of Milner, Georgia" was re-adopted to reflect map amendments which have occurred since its adoption. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2301; Ord. No. 11-6, § 2, 11-9-2011) 
Sec. 118-68. - Identification, alteration, and replacement of the official map. 
(a)  The official map is signed by the mayor of the mayor and council, and bears the seal of the city or that of a notary public under the following words: "This certifies that this is the Official Zoning Map, City Of Milner, Georgia, referred to in section 118-67, together with the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  The official map may be altered only if the proposed alterations are in conformance with the city land use plan (this does not necessarily mean a one-to-one correspondence) and sound comprehensive planning principles. Any alteration of the official map is an amendment to this chapter. The procedure by which amendments are proposed and approved is contained in section 118-5. Any amendment involving changes in zoning district boundaries must be entered on the official map as soon as the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. The entry must be as follows: "On (date) by official action of the mayor and council of the City Of Milner the following change (or changes) were made in the Official Zoning Map, City Of Milner, Georgia: (Brief description of change)." It must be signed by the mayor or the mayor and council. No amendment to portions of this chapter that are illustrated on the official map becomes effective until after the change has been entered as described in this subsection on the official map. 
(c)  Alterations to the official map may be made only by the procedures contained in this section and section 118-5. Any unauthorized alteration of the official map by any person is a violation of this chapter. 
(d)  The official map shall be on display in the office of the administrative officer, and is the final authority as to the current status of zoning district boundaries. 
(e)  If the official map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the mayor and council may adopt a new official map which will replace the previous official map. The new official map is identified as such in the same manner as described in this section. When the new official map is adopted, a notation must be made on the previous official map that it is no longer valid, indicating the date that the new official map was adopted, as a reference aid. The previous official map should be preserved, if it has not been lost or destroyed, for possible future reference. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2302) 
Sec. 118-69. - Zoning district designation for additional land annexed to city. 
(a)  Whenever additional land is annexed to the city, the mayor and council will receive a request for annexation as provided by O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36 (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.). The applicant for annexation will also apply for an amendment to this chapter assigning a zoning designation under this chapter for the subject property should it be annexed. 
(b)  All applications for annexation/zoning amendment must first be reviewed by the planning commission. The planning commission will study the proposed annexation/amendment and determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter, as well as other applicable ordinances of the city. At this time, the administrative officer may review the proposed annexation/amendment and make written recommendations to the planning commission. 
(c)  Approving a zoning district designation for annexed property and adding the subject property to the official map involves amendment to this chapter and alteration of the official map. The procedures contained in sections 118-5 and 118-68 must be followed in handling such an amendment request. 
(d)  The planning commission will formulate its recommendations and transmit the recommendation to the mayor and council on the amendment and the annexation request, recording them in the minutes for that meeting within 30 days of close of the meeting, stating reasons for its recommendations. The planning commission will be deemed to have approved the application in the event its recommendations is not timely made. 
(e)  The administrative officer must post a sign at least two feet by three feet in size in a conspicuous place on the property at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. The sign must set forth the fact that it is a public hearing. It must show the present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, date, time, and place of the scheduled public hearing. A notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 days but not more than 45 days before the hearing. Contents of the notice shall include the following: location of the property, present zoning classification, the proposed zoning classification, and the date, time and place of the public hearing and it must inform the public that additional information may be obtained from the administrative officer. (Note: this public hearing will be conducted by the mayor and council.) 
(f)  After reviewing the record of the public hearing and considering recommendations, the mayor and council will then make an official decision on the proposed amendment. The decision may or may not concur with the recommendations. This decision will be recorded in the official minutes of the meeting. 
(g)  If the application for amendment to set a zoning designation for the subject property is not approved by the mayor and council, then no action on the application for annexation will be taken, since the zoning designation of property proposed to be annexed must first be set according to minimum required policies and procedures before property may be annexed. The applicant may then reapply for another zoning district amendment for an alternative zoning designation if he so desires. 
(h)  If the mayor and council approves the amendment for zoning designation of the subject property, they will then make a decision on the annexation request. This decision will be recorded in the official minutes of the meeting. 
(i)  If the mayor and council deny the annexation request, the approval of the amendment for zoning designation of the subject property becomes void. A minimum period of 12 months must pass before the same amendment/annexation proposal is again submitted for consideration. 
(j)  If the annexation request is approved, the official map will be changed. Procedures specified in section 118-68 must be followed in doing this. 
(k)  Decisions of the mayor and council may be appealed on points of law to the county superior court. Findings of fact, however, may not be appealed. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2304) 
Sec. 118-70. - Zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the exact location of the boundary of a zoning district shown on the official map, the following guidelines will be used in establishing the exact location of the boundary: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line as appearing on the official map divides a single lot that was a single lot at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the requirements for the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies must be extended to the balance of the lot. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following a municipal boundary, the line or lines extended is the boundary. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following a property line or such line extended, the line or lines extended is the boundary. 
(4)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately following the centerline of a streambed, such a centerline is the boundary. 
(5)  Where a zoning district boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to the centerline of a street, road, railroad, or the right-of-way of such a facility, the zoning district boundary is parallel to the line and at a distance from it as indicated by scale on the official map. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2305) 
Sec. 118-71. - Relationship between official map and city land use plan. 
(a)  The city land use plan was prepared by the planning commission and adopted by the mayor and council of the city. It should provide the best possible indication of desirable land use patterns that will meet projected future demand for land uses of various types. The city land use plan supplies a body of information on which decisions on future development may be made that are guided by sound planning principles. The plan does not legally regulate land uses. It contains a land use map, which shows suitable areas for various types of land uses. Actual land uses may not necessarily conform to the land use map. 
(b)  The zoning districts contained on the official map carry standards which must be met by all new development and construction. The arrangements of zoning districts is based on land use information contained in the city land use plan. Establishment and amendment of zoning district boundaries must be in conformance with the city land use plan. (This does not necessarily mean a one-to-one correspondence.) This assures that such amendments to the official map are based on defensible findings of fact as well as sound comprehensive planning principles. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2306) 
Secs. 118-72—118-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 118-101—118-128. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - A-R AGRICULTURAL-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-129. - Purpose. 
A-R zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet areas where the primary activities are those of farming, agriculture, livestock, timber cultivation, and related uses consistent with maintaining the land resources of the city reserved for these purposes. Residences of a low-density nature which are incidental to these activities are also permitted. These districts are free from other use which are incompatible with a low-density agricultural-residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 501) 
Sec. 118-130. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within an A-R district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission as well as the mayor and council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 502) 
Sec. 118-131. - Boundaries of A-R districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all A-R districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 503) 
Sec. 118-132. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in A-R districts: 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling with a floor space of at least 1,400 heated square feet. 
(2)  Industrialized home with a floor area of at least 1,400 heated square feet. 
(3)  Local, state, or federal government building. 
(4)  Garden or crop growing. 
(5)  Publicly owned and operated park or recreation area. 
(6)  Family personal care home. 
(7)  Agriculture. 
(8)  Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(9)  Home occupation. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in A-R districts: 
(1)  Church, synagogue, chapel, or other place of religious worship or educational instruction meeting the following development standards: 
a.  It must be located on either an arterial or collector road; 
b.  The lot must have a minimum road frontage of 200 feet; 
c.  The lot must have an area of at least four acres; 
d.  All buildings must be located at least 50 feet from any property line; 
e.  A buffer must be provided along all side and rear property lines. 
(2)  Nursery school or kindergarten meeting the following development standards: 
a.  At least 200 square feet of outdoor play area must be provided; 
b.  At least 35 square feet of indoor space per child must be provided; 
c.  Outdoor play areas must be enclosed by a fence at least four feet high. 
(3)  School: elementary, middle, high-public or independent school. 
(4)  Ambulance or emergency service. All structures must be set back 200 feet from all property lines. 
(5)  Private club or lodge. 
(6)  Hospital meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Must have a minimum lot area of three acres; 
b.  Must have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet; 
c.  Lot must front on an arterial road as specified in the city land use plan (where one exists). 
(7)  Library. 
(8)  Cemetery. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in A-R districts: 
(1)  Private garage or carport not to exceed the storage capacity of three automobiles per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Structure for the storage of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its grounds. 
(3)  Structure for a children's playhouse and the storage of children's play equipment. 
(4)  Private swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana meeting the following development standards: All such swimming pools must be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet high. 
(5)  Private tennis court and/or basketball facilities; if lighted, lights must be designed so that they do not intrude upon adjacent lots. Such a court may be surrounded by a fence up to ten feet high. 
(6)  Noncommercial garden, including a greenhouse and other customary garden structures not over eight feet high. 
(7)  Deck, patio, barbecue grill, or other such facility. 
(8)  Fence, wall, exterior lighting fixture, or other general landscaping and site development facility. 
(9)  Antenna-satellite, television, radio. 
(10)  Temporary building for storage of materials meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Permitted only in conjunction with construction of a building. 
b.  Allowed either on the same lot where construction is taking place or on an adjacent lot. 
c.  Such a use must be terminated upon completion of construction. 
(11)  The parking of unoccupied travel trailers, motor coaches, or pleasure boats. 
(12)  Signs as permitted by chapter 110. 
(13)  Roadside stands for sale of agricultural products grown on the premises, but not to exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
(14)  Guest quarters meeting the following development standards: 
a.  No more than one is permitted on a lot with another dwelling. 
b.  It is permitted only within a rear yard. 
c.  Such a use must not be used as rental property. 
(d)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must be located in the rear yard. 
(2)  They may not be located closer than five feet to any property line. 
(3)  They may not be located in any front or side yard. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(e)  All uses not permitted within A-R district by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 504) 
Sec. 118-133. - Development standards for A-R districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within A-R districts: 
(1)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be 1,400 heated square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area for sewered areas shall be 130,680 square feet (three acres); however, a lot of record lawfully existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and having an area of less than one acre (nonconforming) may nevertheless be developed with a use which is permitted within an A-R district. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet. 
(4)  Minimum setback. Minimum setback shall be 35 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 40 feet. 
(7)  Minimum slab elevation. The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(8)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet; however, this height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(9)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 40 percent. 
(10)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(11)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(12)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(13)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(14)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(15)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided, changed as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(16)  Lots with multiple frontage. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(17)  Street frontage. No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than 150 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
(18)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(19)  Substandard lots. Any lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, is subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage and are in single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots must be replatted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district. 
b.  Single lots. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such a lot may be used for any use 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 505; Res. of 11-15-2005(2), § 1) 
Secs. 118-134—118-164. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1, R-2 and R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 118-165. - Purpose. 
R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve quiet, relatively low-density neighborhoods of single-family residences as desired by large numbers of people. These districts are free from other uses which are incompatible with single-family homes. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 701) 
Sec. 118-166. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission as well as the mayor and council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation for land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 702) 
Sec. 118-167. - Boundaries of R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 703) 
Sec. 118-168. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts: 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling satisfying the development standards set forth in section 118-169. 
(2)  Local, state, or federal government building. 
(3)  Family personal care home. 
(4)  Publicly owned and operated park or recreation area. 
(5)  Subdivision recreation facilities that are owned, operated, and maintained by a homeowner's association exclusively for the use of residents and their guests. 
(6)  Agriculture, for home use only and excludes commercial poultry and livestock operations. 
(7)  Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts: Day care center meeting the following development standards: compliance with the rules promulgated by the state department of human resources where applicable. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts: 
(1)  Private garage or carport not to exceed the storage capacity of three automobiles per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Structure for the storage of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its grounds. 
(3)  Structure for a children's playhouse and the storage of children's play equipment. 
(4)  Private swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana meeting the following development standards: All such swimming pools must be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet high. 
(5)  Private tennis court and/or basketball facilities; if lighted, lights must be designed so that they do not intrude upon adjacent lots. Such a court may be surrounded by a fence up to ten feet high. 
(6)  Noncommercial garden, including a greenhouse and other customary garden structures not over eight feet high. 
(7)  Deck, patio, barbecue grill, or other such facility. 
(8)  Fence, wall, exterior lighting fixture, or other general landscaping and site development facility. 
(9)  Temporary building for storage of materials meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Permitted only in conjunction with construction of a building; 
b.  Allowed either on the same lot where construction is taking place or on adjacent lots; 
c.  Such a use must be terminated upon completion of construction. 
(10)  The parking of RV-type trailers, motor coaches, or pleasure boats, parked on a concrete pad. 
(11)  Sign as permitted by chapter 110. 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts: home occupations, excluding public garage and repair garage. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must be located in the rear yards. 
(2)  They may not be located closer than five feet from any property line. 
(3)  They may not be located in any front or side yard. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 704; Ord. of 4-19-2006(2)) 
Sec. 118-169. - Development standards for R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts: 
TABLE 7-1 

 
* The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(1)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(2)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(4)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(5)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(7)  Lots with multiple frontage. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(8)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(9)  Substandard lots. Any lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, is subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots must be replatted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district; 
b.  Single lot. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located in as long as all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(10)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(11)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in chapter 114. Consult that document for specific requirements. 
(12)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained by consulting the administrative officer. 
(13)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards are contained in chapter 110. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 705; Res. of 7-19-2005, § 5; Res. of 8-16-2005(1), § 1; Res. of 5-17-2005, § 6; Res. of 11-15-2005(1), § 1; Res. of 1-17-2006(2), § 1) 
Secs. 118-170—118-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - P-M PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-MIXED USE DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-192. - Purpose. 
(a)  P-M zoning districts are intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of large tracts of land of 40 acres or more as planned neighborhoods or communities. 
(2)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning. 
(3)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas. 
(4)  Create a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of other sections of this chapter. 
(5)  Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets as well as lower development and housing costs. 
(6)  Provide an environment of stable character which is compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(b)  Within the planned area, a variety of land uses may be permitted in an orderly relation to one another and to existing land uses. This may be accomplished through the application of sound comprehensive planning principles. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1201) 
Sec. 118-193. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within a P-M district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5, as well as data submitted with the development plan of the applicant for a planned development, must be thoroughly considered by the mayor and council and planning commission when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1202) 
Sec. 118-194. - Boundaries of P-M districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all P-M districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1203) 
Sec. 118-195. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as shown in the approved development plan. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1204) 
Sec. 118-196. - Plan review and approval procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a P-M district, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the administrative officer and the planning commission in order to review the general character of the plan (on the basis of a tentative land use sketch if available), and to obtain information on development standards and ordinances affecting the proposed project. 
(b)  Submission of application for P-M approval. 
(1)  The applicant must file a petition with the administrative officer for approval of the proposed P-M district. This application must be supported by a development plan and a written summary of intent. The relationship between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both existing and proposed, must be shown. The following information must be presented with the application: 
a.  A general location map. 
b.  Existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than five feet based on field surveys or photographic methods. 
c.  The existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of all buildings and structures. 
d.  The approximate location of existing and proposed streets. 
e.  The approximate location of all existing and proposed utilities, including a preliminary utility and drainage plan. 
f.  The present zoning pattern in the area. 
g.  A legal description of the subject property. 
h.  The location and use of existing and proposed public, semipublic, and community facilities such as schools, parks, and open areas on the site. This includes areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for community or public use. 
i.  Perspective drawings of representative building types; however, this is not required for single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
a.  An off-street parking and loading plan. 
b.  An economic feasibility report or market analysis. 
c.  A traffic study of the area, and a circulation plan within the proposed development as well as to and from existing streets adjacent to the site. 
(3)  The written summary of intent submitted with the development plan must include the following information: 
a.  A statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development. 
b.  An explanation of the character of the proposed development; this includes a summary of acres, number and types of dwelling units, and gross density by type of land use. 
c.  A general statement of the proposed development schedule. 
d.  Agreements, provisions, and covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of the development and any common or open areas. 
(c)  Review and approval of P-M application. 
(1)  An application for approval of a P-M district is treated administratively as an application for an amendment to this chapter (rezoning). This is because P-M districts are created only upon request of a developer, whose application materials demonstrate a firm commitment to construction of a well-designed P-M district. Upon approval of the P-M district, existing zoning must be changed to a P-M zone, which is an amendment to this chapter. The amendment procedures contained in sections 118-5 and 118-68 must be followed in granting the amendment to permit the P-M district. 
(2)  The administrative officer will turn over the application materials to the planning commission for its recommendations, The planning commission will thoroughly study the materials and make written recommendations to the mayor and council stating the reasons for its recommendations (according to procedures contained in sections 118-5 and 118-68). 
(3)  The power to approve an amendment creating a P-M district rests with the mayor and council. After conducting the public hearing and considering recommendations from the planning commission (section 118-5), the mayor and council will then make an official decision on the proposed P-M district. The mayor and council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the development plan. 
(4)  If the development plan is approved as submitted, the official map will be changed to indicate P-M district (section 118-68). If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant must file with the administrative officer the following: 
a.  Written notice of consent to the modifications. 
b.  A properly revised site plan. 
(5)  The official map will then be changed (section 118-68). The site plan and supporting information of any approved plan will be properly identified and permanently filed with the administrative officer. 
(6)  No building permits will be issued by the administrative officer until the development plan has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Issuance of building permits. The administrative officer will issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved development plan if the proposed buildings and structures are in conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and all other applicable regulations (see section 118-35). 
(e)  Revision of development plan after approval of plan. 
(1)  Minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be permitted after review and approval by the planning commission; such changes must be consistent with the purposes and intent of the development plan. 
(2)  Any major or substantial change in the approved development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density of land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes must be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council after receipt of recommendations from the administrative officer. A request for a revision of the development plan must be supported by a written statement indicating the nature of the revision and the reasons it is considered necessary or desirable to revise the development. 
(f)  Approval of P-M revoked if construction not begun. Construction of the planned development must begin within one year of the approval of the P-M district. If no construction has begun by then, or if the applicant fails to maintain the approved development schedule, approval of the development plan will lapse. At its discretion and for good cause, the mayor and council may extend the period for beginning construction of any phase of the project for one additional year. If approval of the development plan lapses under this provision, the subject P-M district will be removed from the official map (see section 118-68) and the zoning districts and regulations which were in effect prior to the approval of the development plan will be reinstated. It is not necessary to follow section 118-5 amendatory procedures for this action, since its purpose is to correct an illegal situation caused by the failure of the applicant to fulfill the conditions upon which the approval of the P-M district was granted. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1205) 
Sec. 118-197. - Development standards for P-M districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within P-M districts: 
(1)  Development plan. The approved development plan must be carried out (see section 118-196). 
(2)  Density controls. The maximum number of dwelling units per acre in residential areas of a planned development must not exceed 2.2 dwelling units per net acre of residential development within the P-M district. Net residential acreage refers only to land devoted primarily to residential purposes, exclusive of other uses such as common open space, streets, and lakes. Gross acreage of residential development refers to land devoted primarily to residential purposes as well as open spaces, including private lakes within the P-M district held under individual, common, or collective ownership for the use of residents of the residential development. Gross acreage for residential development does not include areas reserved or dedicated for street rights-of-way. 
(3)  Deviation from required densities. 
a.  The mayor and council may allow higher net or gross residential densities, as well as a higher density of a particular residential use, as long as the applicant can show that such a higher density will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  The mayor and council will consider a deviation from the specified maximum density only upon a favorable recommendation from the planning commission. 
(4)  Dimensional and bulk regulations. The location of all proposed buildings and structures must be shown on the approved development plan; minimum lot sizes, setback lines, lot coverage, and floor areas shown on the development plan must be adhered to. The proposed location and arrangement of structures must not be detrimental to existing or proposed adjacent dwellings or to the development of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Perimeter requirements. The mayor and council, upon recommendation from the planning commission, may impose the following requirements to protect the privacy of existing adjoining uses: structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the P-M district must be set back a distance of 50 feet from the boundary of the P-M district. 
(6)  Control of area after completion. After completion of a planned development, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the P-M district must conform to the approved development plan. If community needs are found to be changing in the future and a revision of the approved development plan is thought to be needed, procedures contained in section 118-196(e) must be followed. 
(7)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(8)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(9)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(11)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(12)  Lots with multiple frontages. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(13)  Landlocked lots. Landlocked lots are not eligible for placement within a P-M zoning district. 
(14)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(15)  Substandard lots. Substandard lots are not eligible for placement within a P-M zoning district. 
(16)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(17)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in applicable development regulations of the city. Consult the administrative officer for specific requirements. 
(18)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the administrative officer. 
(19)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards for signs are contained in chapter 110. Consult that document for specific requirements. 
(20)  Development standards shown in approved development plan. Other development standards shown in an approved development plan apply only to the development shown on the specific development plan. Such development standards must be maintained. (See section 118-196 for related details.) 
(21)  Design standards for all P-M developments. 
a.  Generally. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and ground slope must not create hazards to the property, or to the health or safety of residents. The site must not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse conditions; and no part subject to flooding or erosion can be used for any purpose that would expose people or property to danger. 
b.  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces throughout the development must be protected with a vegetative growth that prevents soil erosion, standing puddles, and dust. If this is not possible, such areas may be covered with a solid material such as stone, or may be paved. 
c.  Site drainage. The ground surfaces throughout the development must be equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner, either through grading or installation of drains. 
d.  Required buffer. A buffer, as defined in section 118-1, is required along all lot lines of the development. This is in addition to common open space. 
e.  Subdivision regulations. Chapter 114 must be used as a guide for detailed specifications. If there is a conflict between this division and chapter 114, the more stringent requirement will apply. 
(22)  Minimum slab elevation. The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1206; Res. of 11-15-2005(3), § 1) 
Secs. 118-198—118-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - P-R PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-218. - Purpose. 
P-R zoning districts are intended to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of land as planned neighborhoods or communities. 
(2)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas. 
(3)  Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets as well as lower development and housing costs. 
(4)  Provide an environment of stable character which is compatible with surrounding residential areas. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1301) 
Sec. 118-219. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within a P-R district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5, as well as data submitted with the development plan of the applicant for a planned development, must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission and mayor and council when determining whether or not the provision of a P-R district is appropriate. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. P-R districts are permitted only where public sewage and water are provided. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1302) 
Sec. 118-220. - Boundaries of P-R districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all P-R districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1303) 
Sec. 118-221. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following are permitted as principal uses in P-R districts: 
(1)  Planned apartment home community. 
(2)  Planned Class A manufactured home community. 
(3)  Recreation area owned, operated, and maintained by the owner of the permitted use, exclusively for the use of residents and their guests. 
(4)  Utility substations. 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with the bottom of the fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in P-R districts: none. 
(c)  The following are permitted as accessory uses in P-R districts: 
(1)  Private garage or carport not to exceed the storage capacity of three automobiles per dwelling unit. 
(2)  Structure for the storage of equipment and supplies used in maintaining the principal building and its grounds. 
(3)  Structure for a children's playhouse and the storage of children's play equipment. 
(4)  Private swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana meeting the following standards: All such swimming pools which are at least two feet deep must be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet high. 
(5)  Private tennis court and/or basketball facilities; if lighted, lights must be designed so that they do not intrude upon adjacent lots. Such a court may be surrounded by a fence up to ten feet high. 
(6)  Noncommercial garden, including a greenhouse and other customary garden structures not over eight feet high. 
(7)  Deck, patio, barbecue grill, or other such facility. 
(8)  Fence, wall, exterior lighting fixture, or other general landscaping and site development facility. 
(9)  Temporary building or storage of materials meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Permitted only in conjunction with construction of a building. 
b.  Allowed either on the same lot where construction is taking place or on adjacent lot. 
c.  Such a use must be terminated upon completion of construction. 
(10)  The parking of usable but unoccupied travel trailers, motor coaches or pleasure boats. 
(11)  Signs as permitted by chapter 110. 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in P-R districts: none. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They may not be located closer than five feet to any property line. 
(2)  Accessory buildings not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within P-R districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1304) 
Sec. 118-222. - Plan review and approval procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a P-R district, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the administrative officer and the planning commission in order to review the general character of the plan (on the basis of tentative land use sketch if available), and to obtain information on development standards and ordinances affecting the proposed project. 
(b)  Submission of application for P-R approval. 
(1)  The applicant must file a petition with the administrative officer for approval of the proposed P-R district. This application must be supported by a development plan and a written summary of intent. The relationship between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both existing and proposed, must be shown. The following information must be presented with the application: 
a.  A general location map. 
b.  Existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than five feet based on field surveys or photographic methods. 
c.  The existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of all buildings and structures. 
d.  The approximate location of existing and proposed streets. 
e.  The approximate location of all existing and proposed utilities, including a preliminary utility and drainage plan. 
f.  The present zoning pattern in the area. 
g.  A legal description of the subject property. 
h.  The location and use of existing and proposed public, semipublic, and community facilities such as schools, parks, and open areas on the site. This includes areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for community or public use. 
i.  Perspective drawings of representative building types; however, this is not required for single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
a.  An off-street parking and loading plan. 
b.  An economic feasibility report or market analysis. 
c.  A traffic study of the area, and a circulation plan within the proposed development as well as to and from existing streets adjacent to the site. 
(3)  The written summary of intent submitted with the development plan must include the following information: 
a.  A statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development. 
b.  An explanation of the character of the proposed development; this includes a summary of acres, number and types of dwelling units, and gross density by type of land use. 
c.  A general statement of the proposed development schedule. 
(c)  Review and approval of P-R application. 
(1)  An application for approval of a P-R district is treated administratively as an application for an amendment to these regulations (rezoning). This is because P-R districts are created only upon request of a developer, whose application materials demonstrate a firm commitment to construction of a well-designed P-R district. Upon approval of the P-R district, existing zoning must be changed to a P-R zone which is an amendment to this chapter. The amendment procedures contained in sections 118-5 and 118-68 must be followed in granting the amendment to permit the P-R district. 
(2)  The administrative officer will turn over the application materials to the planning commission for its recommendations. The planning commission will thoroughly study the materials and make written recommendations to the mayor and council, stating the reasons for its recommendations (according to procedures contained in sections 118-5 and 118-68). 
(3)  The power to approve an amendment creating a P-R district rests with the mayor and council. After conducting the public hearing and considering recommendations from the planning commission (section 118-5), the mayor and council will then make an official decision on the proposed P-R district. The mayor and council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the development plan. 
(4)  If the development plan is approved as submitted, the official map will be changed to indicate the P-R district (section 118-68). If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant must file with the administrative officer the following: 
a.  Written notice of consent to the modifications. 
b.  A properly revised site plan. 
(5)  The official map will then be changed (section 118-68). The site plan and supporting information of any approved plan will be properly identified and permanently filed with the administrative officer. 
(6)  No building permits will be issued by the building official until the development plan has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Issuance of building permits. The administrative officer will issue building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved development plan if the proposed buildings and structures are in conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and all other applicable regulations. (See section 118-35.) 
(e)  Revision of development plan after approval of plan. 
(1)  Minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be permitted after review and approval by the planning commission; such changes must be consistent with the purposes and intent of the development plan. 
(2)  Any major or substantial change in the approved development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density of land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes must be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council after receipt of recommendations. A request for a revision of the development plan must be supported by a written statement indicating the nature of the revision and the reasons it is considered necessary or desirable to revise the development. 
(f)  Approval of P-R revoked if construction not begun. Construction of the planned development must begin within one year of the approval of the P-R district. If no construction has begun by then, or if the applicant fails to maintain the approved development schedule, approval of the development plan will lapse. At its discretion and for good cause, the mayor and council may extend the period for beginning construction of any phase of the project for one additional year. If approval of the development plan lapses under this provision, the subject P-R district will be removed from the official map (see section 118-68) and the zoning districts and regulations which were in effect prior to the approval of the development plan will be reinstated. It is not necessary to follow section 118-5 amendatory procedures for this action, since its purpose is to correct an illegal situation caused by the failure of the applicant to fulfill the conditions upon which the approval of the P-R was granted. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1305) 
Sec. 118-223. - Development standards for P-R districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within P-R districts: 
(1)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a.  Planned apartment home communities. 
1.  Unattached single-family home: 1,400 square feet per unit. 
2.  Duplex family dwellings: 1,100 square feet per unit. 
3.  Multiplex family dwellings: 900 square feet per unit. 
b.  Planned manufactured home communities. All manufactured homes: 900 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum development area. 
a.  Planned apartment home communities: two acres. 
b.  Planned manufactured home communities: five acres. 
(3)  Minimum setback. The front of all buildings must be at least 35 feet from the front property line. 
(4)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 30 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation, except for satellite, television, and radio antennas, to which this limit does apply. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 30 percent. 
(8)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstructions to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(9)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(10)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(11)  Minimum slab elevation. The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(12)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, or off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(13)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(14)  Lots with multiple frontages. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(15)  Landlocked lots. Landlocked lots are not eligible for placement within a P-R zoning district. 
(16)  Street frontage. No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than 90 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
(17)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(18)  Substandard lots. Substandard lots are not eligible for placement within a P-R zoning district. 
(19)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(20)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading area, and other such physical site improvements are contained in chapter 114. Consult chapter 114 for specific requirements. 
(21)  Off-street parking and service requirements. Reserved. 
(22)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the administrative officer. 
(23)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards for signs are contained in chapter 110. Consult chapter 110 for specific requirements. 
(24)  Development standards shown in approved development plan. Other development standards shown in an approved development plan apply only to the development shown on the specific development plan. Such development standards must be maintained. (See section 118-222 for related details.) 
(25)  Design standards for all P-R developments. 
a.  Generally. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and ground slope must not create hazards to the property, or to the health or safety of residents. The site must not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse conditions; and no part subject to flooding or erosion can be used for any purpose that would expose people or property to danger. 
b.  Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces throughout the development must be protected with a vegetative growth that prevents soil erosion, standing puddles, and dust. If this is not possible, such areas may be covered with a solid material such as stone, or may be paved. 
c.  Site drainage. The ground surfaces throughout the development must be equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner, either through grading or installation of drains. 
d.  Street width: 
1.  Internal streets: All internal streets must be paved. Minimum required width is as follows: 
(i)  No on-street parking: 22 feet. 
(ii)  Parking one side: 28 feet. 
(iii)  Parking both sides: 36 feet. 
2.  Dead end streets: All dead and streets must have a turn-around at the closed end, with an outside paved diameter of at least 82 feet. 
e.  Street lighting. Outdoor lighting is required which will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night: 
1.  All parts of the street system of the development: ten footcandles. 
2.  Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections, steps, and stepped ramps: individually lighted, with a minimum of 20 footcandles. 
f.  Street construction and design. 
1.  Pavement. All streets must be paved with a material and thickness which meets the standards specified in chapter 114. 
2.  Grades: Maximum permitted grade for streets is ten percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of 15 percent may be permitted upon specific approval of the administrative officer, if traffic safety is assured by adequate leveling areas, and avoidance of lateral curves. 
3.  Offset intersecting streets (street jogs) and reverse curves. Offset intersecting streets must be offset at the centerlines at least 150 feet. Reverse curves must be connected by a straight section that is at least 150 feet long. 
g.  Paved parking areas. 
1.  Paved off-street parking areas must be provided for the use of residents. At least two spaces for each dwelling unit must be furnished. In a planned manufactured home community, resident parking must be furnished at the manufactured home space which it serves. 
2.  Paved parking areas for guests may be either on-street, in a separate off-street lot, or a combination of both. At least 0.2 paved guest parking spaces per dwelling unit must be furnished. 
h.  Walks. 
1.  Common walk system. Common walks, where provided, should be at least 3½ feet wide. 
2.  Individual walks. All dwellings must be connected either to paved streets, paved drives, or parking spaces adjacent to paved streets with a minimum width of two feet. 
i.  Service buildings and other such facilities. Service buildings, recreation buildings and other such facilities of the development must meet the requirements of applicable codes and development regulations adopted by the city. 
j.  Minimum common open space. Ten percent of total area undeveloped or common green space for public use. 
(26)  Planned apartment communities. The following required development standards apply only to planned apartment communities: 
a.  Maximum density: ten units per acre, if the building is a two story. Six per acre if the building is a single story. 
b.  Maximum lot coverage by building: 30 percent. 
c.  Minimum separation of units: 25 feet. 
(27)  Planned manufactured home communities. The following required development standards apply only to planned manufactured home communities: 
a.  ANSI A225.1: All requirements of ANSI A225.1 must be met by the planned manufactured home community. All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with ANSI A225.1. 
b.  Maximum density: five units per net acre, where central sewage and water is provided. 
c.  Minimum development size: Five acres. 
d.  Minimum separation of dwelling units: 25 feet. 
e.  Minimum manufactured home space lot: 6,000 square feet. 
f.  Maximum manufactured home space coverage: 50 percent. 
g.  Minimum manufactured home space front yard: 20 feet. 
h.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 1,400 square feet. 
(28)  Public water and sewage service required. All dwellings within P-R districts must be served by public water and sewage. Where such lines do not already exist, the developer is responsible for installation of them. (See chapter 114 for additional details on utility installation.) 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1306; Res. of 11-15-2005(4), § 1; Res. of 5-17-2005, §§ 2—5; Ord. No. 2007-14, §§ 1—6, 12-13-07; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 5-15-2017) 
Secs. 118-224—118-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-O OFFICE-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-255. - Purpose. 
R-O zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve districts for lower-density office activities, with a mix of certain compatible residential activities also permitted. In many cases, this district may be appropriate to provide a transition from residential uses where it is elected not to use a buffer for such purposes and where adequate space exists for such a transition area. R-O development standards require adequate yard space and off-street parking and service facilities. Permitted uses are restricted and protected from encroachment by uses capable of adversely affecting the limited character of the district. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1401) 
Sec. 118-256. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within an R-O district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1402) 
Sec. 118-257. - Boundaries of R-O districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all R-O districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1403) 
Sec. 118-258. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in R-O districts: 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling with a floor area of at least 1,400 heated square feet. 
(2)  Professional or business office meeting the following development standards: no wholesale or retail merchandise may be offered for sale. 
(3)  Family personal care home. 
(4)  Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven-wire fence at least eight feet high with the bottom of the fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in R-O districts: none. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in R-O districts: 
(1)  Those determined by the administrative officer to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(2)  Satellite dish antennas and television antennas. 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in R-O districts: home occupations, excluding public garages and repair garages. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must be located in the rear yards. 
(2)  They must be located at least five feet from any property line. 
(3)  They may not be located in any front or side yard. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within R-O districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1404; Res. of 7-1-2005, § 4; Ord. No. 2007-3, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-259. - Development standards for R-O districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within R-O districts: 
(1)  Minimum floor area for buildings. Minimum floor area for buildings shall be 1,400 heated square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area for sewered areas shall be 20,000 square feet (0.459 acre); however, a lot of record lawfully existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and having less than one acre (nonconforming) may nevertheless be developed with a use which is permitted within an R-O district. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(4)  Minimum setback. Minimum setback shall be 30 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 12 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation, except for satellite, television and radio antennas, to which this limit does apply. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 50 percent. 
(9)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstructions to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(10)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(11)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(12)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory building may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(13)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(15)  Lots with multiple frontage. In case of a corner lot or double-frontage lot, the front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(16)  Street frontage. No principle building may be erected on any lot which has less than 75 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
(17)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(18)  Substandard lots. Any lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, is subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots must be replatted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district; 
b.  Single lot. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(19)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(20)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in applicable development regulations of the city. Consult the administrative officer for specific requirements. 
(21)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained by consulting the administrative officer. 
(22)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards are contained in chapter 110. Consult that document for specific requirements. 
(23)  Minimum slab elevation. The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1405; Res. of 11-15-2005(5), § 1) 
Secs. 118-260—118-281. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - C-2 COMMERCIAL-GENERAL HIGHWAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-282. - Purpose. 
C-2 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve business areas that are motor vehicle-oriented rather than pedestrian-oriented. C-2 districts provide areas that are convenient and attractive for retail activities, business transactions, and services to the public designed primarily to meet the day-to-day shopping and service needs not only of residents of the city, but of surrounding communities as well. Off-street parking and minimum yards are required. These areas are more suburban in nature than of a downtown character. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1601) 
Sec. 118-283. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within a C-2 district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission and the mayor and council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the bases upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1602) 
Sec. 118-284. - Boundaries of C-2 districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all C-2 districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1603) 
Sec. 118-285. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in C-2 districts: 
(1)  Any retail business or service. 
(2)  Gasoline service station that meets the following development standards: 
a.  All structures, including underground storage tanks, must be placed at least 30 feet from any property line. 
b.  Curb cuts must be located at least 15 feet from the intersection of street lines. 
(3)  Hotel. 
(4)  Office. 
(5)  Bank. 
(6)  Radio station. 
(7)  Printing, copying, publishing establishment. 
(8)  Off-street parking lot or parking garage. 
(9)  Education or training facility. 
(10)  Lodge or club. 
(11)  Local, state, or federal government building. 
(12)  Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least eight feet high with the bottom of the fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in C-2 districts: none. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in C-2 districts: 
(1)  Those determined by the administrative officer to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(2)  Manufacturing in connection with the principal retail business or service on the lot meeting the following standards: 
a.  Occupies less than 40 percent of the floor area. 
b.  Employs no more than five persons. (The intent here is to assure that activities which are primarily manufacturing in nature are directed away from commercial areas and into manufacturing areas. Establishments with five or fewer manufacturing employees in connection with a commercial activity are considered to be primarily commercial and compatible with a commercial district. Manufacturing activities with more than five employees would be considered large enough to belong in a manufacturing district with other such uses rather than in a commercial district.) 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in C-2 districts: none. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They may not be located closer than five feet to any property line. 
(2)  Accessory buildings not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within C-2 districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1604) 
Sec. 118-286. - Development standards for C-2 districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within C-2 districts. 
(1)  Minimum floor area for buildings. Minimum floor area for buildings shall be none. 
(2)  Minimum lot area: Minimum lot area for sewered areas shall be none. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 30 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front setback. Minimum front setback shall be the sidewalk. 
(5)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be ten feet or firewall. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 75 percent. 
(9)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstructions to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(10)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(11)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(12)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(13)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(15)  Lots with multiple frontages. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(16)  Street frontage. No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than 30 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
(17)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(18)  Substandard lots. Any lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, is subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots must be replatted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district; 
b.  Single lot. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(19)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(20)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading area, and other such physical site improvements are contained in chapter 114. Consult the administrative officer for specific requirements. 
(21)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the administrative officer. 
(22)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards for signs are contained in chapter 110. Consult chapter 110 for specific requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1605) 
Sec. 118-287. - Apartments in commercial storefronts. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of allowing residential apartments in commercial storefronts on a limited basis in certain zoning districts is to encourage residential uses within these districts, to create an alternative housing option, to facilitate a housing option that is compatible with street level commercial uses with minimum disruption to those uses, and to provide an added security measure by creating a district that is active 24 hours a day. 
(b)  District permitted. Residential apartments in downtown storefronts are permitted in C-2 overlay districts only. 
(c)  Building codes. All such residential units shall comply with all existing building and fire codes, NFPA Life Safety Code, and 2002 Edition Southern Building Code Standard Fire Prevention Code with fire walls. 
(d)  Restrictions. 
(1)  A minimum of 50 percent of the ground floor must be reserved for commercial use and no ground floor apartment shall face the front street. 
(2)  All window treatments shall be off-white colors with no signs, drawings, or photographs incorporated therein. Nothing shall hang from the outside of windows of the residential area. 
(3)  No outside mailboxes shall be allowed. Inside mailboxes or mail slots shall be used. 
(4)  No outside radio or television antennas are allowed. Satellite dishes, if used, must not be visible from the front street. 
(5)  No weekly or daily boarding rooms shall be permitted. Only complete dwelling units as defined herein may be established. 
(6)  Each dwelling unit shall be furnished with connections for a washer and dryer or be located no more than 100 feet from a common area accessible to residents. 
(7)  Outside building identification numbers shall be provided and not to exceed six inches in height. 
(8)  No drying of clothes shall be permitted on the outside of any building. 
(9)  No A/C units shall be visible from the front or side public street. 
(10)  No outdoor cooking shall be permitted. 
(11)  No maintenance, washing, or detailing of vehicles is permitted. 
(12)  No recreation, entertainment, public gathering, or placement of furniture shall be allowed on the sidewalks adjacent to the building containing the units. 
(13)  No garage, yard, estate, rummage, or other similar sales shall be permitted. 
(14)  Entry to any upstairs unit or to a hallway serving one or more upstairs units shall be provided by a stairway opening directly to the outside at street level. 
(15)  Minimum floor area per dwelling units: 

 
(e)  Parking. 
(1)  Each resident of such units shall apply for and purchase a yearly parking permit from the city clerk to be displayed on parked vehicle. The maximum number of permits allowed shall be one for an efficiency and two for all other units. The cost of each permit shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees set yearly. All vehicles shall be parked on a paved or publicly marked space and not restricting emergency access to building entrances. 
(2)  Storage of vehicles is not permitted in the downtown area. Storage is defined as a registered vehicle remaining parked for more than 24 hours in a public space. Illegally parked vehicles will be subject to a police fine. 
(Ord. No. Z10-2, 9-8-2010) 
Secs. 118-288—118-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - I-N INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-306. - Purpose. 
Institutional zoning districts (I-N districts) are intended to establish and preserve districts for institutional uses. The regulations which apply within the I-N zoning district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for institutional uses that are located so as to provide nearby areas with convenient facilities. These regulations are also intended to reduce traffic congestion, avoid the development of "strip" type business areas and discourage encroachment by other uses capable of adversely affecting the public/semipublic character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1(1501), 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-307. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within an I-N district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission and the mayor and council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will ensure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1(1502), 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-308. - Boundaries of I-N districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all institutional districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1(1503), 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-309. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principle uses are permitted in the I-N districts: 
(1)  Government buildings. 
(2)  Group personal care home. 
(3)  Congregate personal care home. 
(4)  Intermediate care home. 
(5)  Clinic. 
(6)  Nursing home. 
(7)  Hospital. 
(8)  Club or lodge. 
(9)  School, public or independent. 
(10)  College or university. 
(11)  Business or commercial school. 
(12)  Publicly owned and operated park or recreation area. 
(13)  Cemetery. 
(14)  Church, synagogue, chapel, or other place of religious worship. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in I-N districts: None. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in I-N districts: Those determined by the administrative officer to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in I-N districts: None. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They must be located in the rear yard. 
(2)  They must be located at least five feet from any property line. 
(3)  They may not be located in any front or side yard. 
(4)  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within the I-N districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1(1504), 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-310. - Development standards for I-N districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within the I-N districts: 
(1)  Minimum floor area for buildings. Minimum floor area for buildings shall be 1,400 heated square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area shall be as specified by the county health department, but in no case less than two acres if public water and public sewer are not available. The minimum lot area may be reduced to one acre where public water is provided to the site or to 20,000 square feet if public water and public sewer are available. However, a lot of record lawfully existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and having an area which does not conform to the above standards may nevertheless be developed with a use which is permitted within the institutional district if approved by the county health department. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(4)  Minimum setback. Minimum setback shall be 30 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 12 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation, except for satellite, television and radio antennas, to which this limit does apply. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 50 percent. 
(9)  Sight distance. In order to ensure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery or other obstructions to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(10)  Applicability to land, buildings and open space. No building, structure, land or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(11)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(12)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory building may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(13)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards are contained in chapter 110. Consult chapter 110 for specific requirements. 
(15)  Minimum slab elevation. The base of the slab of each principal building shall be at least six inches above the finished grade, with a minimum vertical rise of six inches for every 12 feet of horizontal run. 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, § 1(1505), 3-21-2007) 
Secs. 118-311—118-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - M-1 MANUFACTURING-LIGHT DISTRICT 

Sec. 118-336. - Purpose. 
M-1 zoning districts are intended to establish and preserve physically and aesthetically desirable areas in which clean, low-intensity manufacturing activities may locate and be protected from the intrusion of incompatible land uses. By having such areas available, both new and existing industries may operate and undertake expansion of facilities with the least possible adverse effect on other types of activities which might be incompatible with manufacturing. The elimination of nonmanufacturing activities from M-1 districts benefits manufacturing activities by removing some possible obstacles to their smooth operation and expansion. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1801) 
Sec. 118-337. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within an M-1 district. 
The factors contained in section 118-5 must be thoroughly considered by the mayor and council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles are the basis upon which the decision is made. Land use decisions which are based on sound planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1802) 
Sec. 118-338. - Boundaries of M-1 districts. 
The official map (section 118-67) shows the boundaries of all M-1 districts within the city. Article III of this chapter also contains additional information concerning interpreting district boundaries, amending boundaries, etc. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1803) 
Sec. 118-339. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following principal uses are permitted in the M-1 districts: 
(1)  Manufacturing activity which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. 
(2)  Wholesale and warehousing operation. 
(3)  Building material yard which is entirely enclosed by a fence that is at least six feet high and screens the yard from view. 
(4)  Public garage. 
(5)  Repair garage. 
(6)  Newspaper or printing plant. 
(7)  Off-street parking lot or parking garage. 
(8)  Armory. 
(9)  Bottling plant. 
(10)  Cabinet shop. 
(11)  Cold storage, ice plant or freezer locker. 
(12)  Cosmetic and pharmaceuticals manufacturing. 
(13)  Dairy plant or ice cream manufacturing. 
(14)  Distribution of products or merchandise. 
(15)  Dry cleaning or laundering establishment. 
(16)  Education or training facility. 
(17)  Electrical appliance and equipment sales and repair. 
(18)  Electronic manufacturing and assembly. 
(19)  Fabricating shop such as woodworking, upholstery, or sheet metal shop. 
(20)  Machine shop. 
(21)  Plumbing shop or other contractor, including open storage of materials when located in rear yard. 
(22)  Printing, publishing or reproducing establishment. 
(23)  Sign painting and fabricating shop. 
(24)  Textile manufacturing plant. 
(25)  Local, state, or federal government building. 
(26)  Agriculture. 
(27)  Utility substation meeting the following development standards: 
a.  Structures must be placed at least 30 feet from all property lines. 
b.  Structures must be enclosed by a woven-wire fence at least eight feet high with bottom of fence either flush with the ground or with a masonry footing. 
c.  No vehicles or equipment may be stored on the lot. 
d.  A buffer must be maintained along the side and rear property lines. 
(28)  Adult entertainment establishments (only allowed on parcels fronting on Georgia Highway 7/U.S. Highway 41). In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all adult entertainment establishments are subject to the regulations of chapter 22 of the City Code. 
(29)  Tattoo and body art studios (only allowed on parcels fronting on Georgia Highway 7/U.S. Highway 41). In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all tattoo and body art studios are subject to the regulations of chapter 22 of the City Code. 
(b)  The following principal uses are permitted as special exceptions in M-1 districts: airport or heliport. 
(c)  The following accessory uses are permitted in M-1 districts: Those determined by the administrative officer to be customarily appurtenant to those uses permitted in this district. 
(d)  The following accessory uses are permitted as special exceptions in M-1 districts: none. 
(e)  All accessory uses must meet the following standards: 
(1)  They may not be located closer than five feet to any property line. 
(2)  Accessory buildings and structures not attached to the principal building must be located at least 12 feet from the principal building on the lot. 
(f)  All uses not permitted within M-1 districts by this section are specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1804; Ord. No. 14-3, § 1, 6-11-2014) 
Sec. 118-340. - Development standards for M-1 districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in articles I and II of this chapter, the following standards are required within M-1 districts: 
(1)  Minimum floor area for buildings. Minimum floor area for buildings shall be none. 
(2)  Minimum lot area. Minimum lot area for sewered areas shall be 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
(3)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front setback. Minimum front setback shall be 35 feet. 
(5)  Minimum side yard. Minimum side yard shall be 20 feet. 
(6)  Minimum rear yard. Minimum rear yard shall be 40 feet. 
(7)  Maximum building height. Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. This height limit does not apply to projections not intended for human habitation. For buildings and structures with such projections, the minimum required yards must be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of height greater than 35 feet. 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage by building. Maximum lot coverage by building shall be 40 percent. 
(9)  Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(10)  Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(11)  Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this chapter. 
(12)  Only one principal building per lot. Only one principal building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot, except for planned developments or as otherwise provided. 
(13)  Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in this chapter. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this chapter must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may not be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(15)  Lots with multiple frontages. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(16)  Landlocked lots. Not allowed in M-1 districts. 
(17)  Street frontage. No principal building may be erected on any lot which has less than 30 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
(18)  Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building may be included as a part of the yard, off-street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this chapter. 
(19)  Substandard lots. Any lot existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, is subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
a.  Adjoining lots in same ownership. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots must be replatted or reparcelled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district. 
b.  Single lot. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, such a lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located as long as all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(20)  Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(21)  Physical design standards. Minimum design standards for driveways, loading areas, and other such physical site improvements are contained in chapter 114. Consult the administrative officer for specific requirements. 
(22)  Off-street parking and service requirements. Minimum standards for off-street parking and service requirements are contained in the City Of Milner Standard for Off-Street Parking and Service Facilities (Appendix F), attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(23)  Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the administrative officer. 
(24)  Signs. Minimum design and location standards are contained in chapter 110. Consult chapter 110 for specific requirements. 
(25)  Yards abutting railroads. Side yards and rear yards are not required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1805) 
Secs. 118-341—118-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - S-2 SENSITIVE LAND-WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 118-369. - Purpose. 
(a)  S-2 is an overlay district, which applies additional standards to specific areas which may lie within any of the districts referred to in article IV, divisions 2—8. In each zoning district located within the boundaries of the S-2 district, both the regulations of that district and the regulations of the S-2 district apply. If required development standards are specified for the same item in both districts, the more stringent governs. 
(b)  The purpose of this district is to protect certain watersheds which are vital to area public water supplies and have a unique environmental importance to the city. This district is intended to maintain a high water quality of the surface water (rivers, creeks, streams, and springs) and underground water, and to help assure that a high quality of water is maintained in the future. The zoning for the district is intended to provide for certain permitted uses, and to protect the area from the polluting effects of more intense development and from encroachments of those uses that are not compatible with a protected watershed. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2101) 
Sec. 118-370. - Features which make land suitable for inclusion within the S-2 district. 
Areas that lie within watersheds which are vital to area public water supplies and have a unique environmental importance to the city are included within the S-2 district. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2102) 
Sec. 118-371. - Boundaries of S-2 districts. 
The S-2 district is delineated on the S-2 Sensitive Land-Watershed Protection Map, attached to the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, copies of which are on file in the city clerk's office, which is made a part of this chapter by reference, and is used to show the boundaries of the S-2 district. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2103) 
Sec. 118-372. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Overlay district. As already stated, S-2 is an overlay district, which applies additional standards to specific areas which may lie within any zoning district. If required development standards are specified for the same item in both districts, the more stringent governs. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Each zoning district (not an overlay district) specified a list of permitted principal uses, and accessory uses. That list of permitted uses given for each primary zoning district must be adhered to on land to which the S-2 overlay district is also applied. However, the list of prohibited uses given in subsection (c) of this section applies to all S-2 land, regardless of which primary zoning district in which it lies. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited within the S-2 district: 
(1)  Sewage treatment facility, unless prior approval is granted by the mayor and council and the state environmental protection division (EPD). 
(2)  Commercial business which causes, sells, stores, or maintains any toxic chemicals, toxic wastes or toxic products. 
(3)  Agricultural activity that does not strictly comply with the Georgia Pesticide Control Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. § 2-7-50 et seq.), Georgia Pesticide Use and Application Act of 1976 (O.C.G.A. § 2-7-90 et seq.), and O.C.G.A. § 2-1-4. 
(4)  Industry, business or facility which uses, makes or creates as a product or byproduct any toxic wastes, heavy materials, grease, animal fat, or organic loading. 
(5)  Dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other harmful products onto the land, into the atmosphere, or in a stream or body of water. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2104) 
Sec. 118-373. - Development standards for S-2 districts. 
(a)  As already stated, S-2 is an overlay district, which applies additional standards to specific areas which may lie within any zoning district. If required development standards are specified for the same item in both districts, the more stringent governs. 
(b)  The developer/owner must comply with the state Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance as well as any other applicable development regulations. 
(c)  Any setback measurements stated in this section are measured from the outer edge of any river, creek, stream, spring, or body of water that is located within the S-2 district, or the outer property line of any property owned, operated, managed, or maintained by any government agency in the city as an existing reservoir or designated by a government agency in the city as a future reservoir. 
(d)  For any property located within 1,000 feet of any property owned, managed, maintained or operated by any government in the city as an existing reservoir or designated by a government agency in the city as a future reservoir, the following development standards are required: 
(1)  Agricultural uses. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Three acres. 
b.  Minimum front yard: 250 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: 250 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 250 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback for cultivation: 250 feet. 
(2)  Residential uses. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Three acres. 
b.  Minimum front yard: 250 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: 250 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 250 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback for cultivation: 250 feet. 
(3)  Commercial uses. None permitted. 
(4)  Industrial uses. None permitted. 
(e)  For other properties located within the S-2 district, but not located within 1,000 feet of any property owned, managed, maintained, or operated by any government in the city as an existing reservoir or designated by a government agency in the city as a future reservoir, the following development standards are required: 
(1)  Agricultural uses. 
a.  Minimum lot area: Three acres. 
b.  Minimum front yard: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: 100 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 100 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback for nitrification field lines: 100 feet. 
(2)  Residential uses. 
a.  Minimum lot area: 2.00 acres for single-family dwellings, unless served by public sewage; 43,560 square feet per two-family dwelling (must be served by public sewage); 4,356 square feet per dwelling unit for multifamily dwellings (must be served by public sewage). 
b.  Minimum front yard: 100 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: 100 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 100 feet. 
e.  Minimum setback for nitrification field lines: 100 feet. 
(3)  Commercial uses. 
a.  Minimum lot area: 2.00 acres. 
b.  Minimum front yard: 200 feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: 200 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: 200 feet. 
(f)  No principal or accessory buildings may be constructed any lower than the maximum flood elevation for a distance of one mile downstream from any existing or designated planned reservoir dam. 
(g)  Should the owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land included in the S-2 district propose to subdivide any portion of such property, the owner or his authorized agent must submit to the administrative officer a plat or drawing to scale showing the exact location of any surface water that is located on or within 250 feet of the subject property prior to a request for rezoning or for any permit. 
(h)  Variances may be considered by the mayor and council as to lot sizes and yards provided that sewage generated by the facility located on the property is serviced by an approved public sewerage facility. However, variances may not be made as to any residential, commercial, agricultural, or industrial facilities which use, make, or create as a product or a byproduct any toxic substance or waste. 
(i)  All other yard requirements of the primary zoning district in which a specific parcel of property lies must be complied with where they are either more stringent than or are not addressed by S-2 development standards. 
(Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2105) 
Secs. 118-374—118-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 118-401. - Buffers required in commercial, institutional and manufacturing districts. 
(a)  All property zoned commercial, institutional and manufacturing shall have a buffer on any side or rear property lines adjacent to a residential district. Such buffer shall be provided with screening as specified in section 118-402. 
(b)  The mayor and council, upon recommendation by the planning commission, may require a buffer between other districts or land uses when it is determined by the planning commission that a buffer is necessary to insulate adjacent properties from adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2007-8, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Sec. 118-402. - Screening required. 
Whenever screening is required by this chapter or as a condition of zoning imposed by the mayor and council, a durable masonry wall, or fence or hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such wall or fence shall be at least six feet in height, but no greater than eight feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot lines of the adjoining properties. When hedges or natural plantings are used, together with the fence prescribed, to form the required screening, the minimum sufficient opacity shall be deemed to require no less than three feet of plantings and/or hedge in the area immediately adjacent to the fence, measured along the ground surface from the fence to the inside border of said plantings and/or hedge. Such plantings must be in place prior to the issuance of a building permit for any improvements. Hedges and plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than two years from the time of planting. 
(Ord. No. 2007-8, § 2, 3-21-2007) 
Secs. 118-403—118-419. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MILNER, GEORGIA 
DIVISION 1. - JURISDICTION AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 118-420. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Commercial/Industrial Development Ordinance of the City of Milner, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(101), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-421. - Authority. 
The power of the City of Milner to enact an ordinance governing the development standards for commercial and industrial development within its municipal city limits is set forth in the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(102), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-422. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply to all land within the City of Milner. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(103), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-423. - Purposes. 
This article seeks to encourage the development of desirable land use patterns within the City of Milner, the promotion of which is intended to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of conditions which can threaten the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Milner. This article promotes the following purposes: 
(1)  Encourage the development of the City of Milner as an economically sound and stable community; 
(2)  Assure the provision of required utilities, facilities and services to new land development within the City of Milner; 
(3)  Assure the redevelopment of the commercial areas located in or near the downtown of the City of Milner in a manner consistent with the historic character and architecture of the area; 
(4)  Assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land development through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other purposes; 
(5)  Assure the wise development of new areas in harmony with the City of Milner's Comprehensive Plan; 
(6)  Assure consideration of any environmental impact (past, present and future) as a result of new land development or redevelopment of already developed areas; and 
(7)  Assure site environmental inspection, clean-up and certification. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(104), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-424—118-439. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 118-440. - Interpretation of common terms. 
When used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meaning as defined in this article. Terms not defined here have the same meaning as is found in most dictionaries, where consistent with the context of this article. The terms "must," "will" and "shall" are mandatory in nature, indicating that an action has to be done. The term "may" is permissive and allows discretion regarding an action. When consistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "developer" includes a firm, corporation, copartnership, association, joint venture, institution or person. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel". The word "building" includes the word "structure." The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(201), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-441. - General definitions. 
Administrative officer means the city manager or such other individual or authorized representative designated by the mayor and council to be responsible for the enforcement of this article. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Buffer means that portion of a lot established for open space purposes and intended to separate properties with different and possibly incompatible types of use. A buffer shall not be occupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted by this article. Where required by this article, a buffer must include the installation of a suitable visual screen in accordance with the provisions of the City of Milner Zoning Ordinance. 
Building means any structure having a roof and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building line means the line that represents the distance a building must be set back from the boundary line of a lot, measured at the foundation of the building. 
Building setback line means a line parallel to a specified minimum distance from the front, side or rear property lines beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building projects with the exception of roof overhang, steps and the subsurface projection of footings. 
Center line, street means that line surveyed and monumented by the governing authority, as the center line of a street or if such a center line has not been surveyed, it is the line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
City means the City of Milner, Georgia. 
Comprehensive plan means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the mayor and council, as amended. 
Construction plan means a plan which shows all street design and profiles, topographic information, utility construction plans, sediment and erosion control plans and other information which may be required by the administrative officer. It is submitted to the administrative officer and requires only his approval after review by the appropriate city departments. 
Crosswalk means a right of way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use and designated to provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Curb cut means the point at which vehicular access is provided to an adjoining street from a lot. 
Design standards means the specifications to land owners or developers for the preparation of plans indicating (among other things) the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of such characteristics as rights-of-way, setbacks, etc. 
Downtown development authority means the downtown development authority of the city, created pursuant to the provisions of state law governing such authorities. 
Downtown development authority overlay zone means that portion of the city bounded as follows: On the north by the intersection of Main Street and Liberty Hill Street; on the south by the intersection of Main Street and Garden Circle; on the east and west by a line a distance of 750 feet running parallel to the centerline of Main Street. This is the same area identified on a map designated as the downtown development authority overlay zone map. 
Easement means the right or privilege of using another's property, for purposes such as constructing and maintaining sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewers, gas lines, bicycle paths, pedestrian ways and other purposes. 
Elevation, front means the view of a building or group of buildings as seen from directly in front of the structure. 
Environmental matters means those matters pertaining to possible soil and groundwater contamination, including storage tanks, chemical use, storage and disposition of hazardous waste, solid waste disposal, air quality and surface water contamination. 
Flood boundary means that area threatened by possible flood under normal to severe circumstance; determined as shown on the flood insurance rate map, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Lot means a parcel of land under single person or single entity ownership occupied or capable of being occupied by one or more buildings and customarily incidental accessory buildings or uses, including such open spaces as are required by this article. 
Lot, corner means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court, Lamar County, Georgia, or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds, the plat or description of which has been recorded in said office. If a portion of a parcel has been conveyed at the time of the adoption of this article, the remaining portion of the lot or parcel will be considered a lot of record. 
Lot remnant means any portion or portions of a lot not suitable for building upon because of size or topography and remaining after the transfer of other portions of the lot to adjoining lots. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. If a corner lot, the distance between lot lines measured along the front building line that parallels or more nearly parallels the rear lot line. 
Owners of record means the owner(s) of property as specified on the deed of the lot of record. 
Parks and playgrounds means public or community land, open spaces or recreation areas represented on a subdivision plat as dedicated, reserved or intended to be reserved for recreational purposes. 
Pedestrian way means cross or other areas designed and marked specifically for pedestrian traffic. 
Percentage of grade means measured down the street centerline, the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet or horizontal distance. 
Planned development means a coordinated development designed and constructed according to a development plan which has been approved by the city. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Pre-application review means an initial and informal stage of review at which the developer may make known proposals and the city may respond and/or advise the developer concerning the application of the provisions of this article. 
Private drive means a nonpublic, privately owned accessway. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties, or conditions recorded with an approved plat and running with the title to the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed or improved with the intent of protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of a given area. 
Public hearing means an official session of the planning commission or mayor and council advertised according to law and called for purposes specified in the public notice. 
Reserve strip means a strip or parcel of land along, around or between properties for the purpose of restricting access. 
Review agency means any designated agency other than the planning commission or the mayor and council which may review appropriate parts of plan submissions by reason of technical capability, authority or interest. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land designed, reserved, dedicated or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation and owned by a county or municipality. 
Road means a public or private right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to and between properties and designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard or place. 
(1)  Alley or service drive means a minor accessway used for service access or property access under specified circumstances to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
(2)  Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(3)  Road width means the shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the road right-of-way. 
(4)  Local street/road means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties and to serve travel demands in the immediate area. For purposes of this chapter, a local street/road within the city shall be any street which is not designated as either a collector street/road and/or arterial street/road. 
(5)  Collector street/road : means a street which usually serves to either provide direct access to lots or distribute traffic from individual lots or distribute traffic from individual lots to major streets or arterials. It may also connect neighborhoods with one another. It should be designed to discourage excessive speeds and through traffic. 
(6)  Arterial street/road means a street which usually serves to either provide direct access to lots or distribute traffic from individual lots and collector streets through the city. It may also connect neighborhoods with one another. It should be designed to discourage excessive speeds and through traffic. For purposes of this chapter, the following streets within the city are designated as arterial: Main Street f/k/a Georgia Highway 41, US s41/GA7, Zebulon Street, Birch Street and Liberty Hill Street. 
(7)  Tangent means a straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where the tangent meets the curve. 
Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the provisions of this article. 
Subdivision means the division of a lot of record at the time of enactment of this article into three or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose whether immediate or future of sale, legacy or building development. 
(1)  This definition includes all of the following: 
a.  All divisions of land involving a new street; 
b.  All divisions of land involving a change in existing streets; 
c.  Any resubdivision of land; 
d.  The process of subdividing; and 
e.  Any land or area subdivided. 
(2)  This definition does not include the following: 
a.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter; 
b.  The transfer of property by the owner to a member of the immediate family (parent, spouse or child); 
c.  The transfer of unsubdivided land or the transfer of a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county prior to the initial effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
d.  The division of land among heirs by judicial decree; and 
e.  The division of land into parcels of five or more acres where no new street is involved. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(202), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-442—118-449. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FEES 

Sec. 118-450. - Fees. 
The following fees shall be assessed for submission, engineering cost, review and approval of construction plans for commercial/industrial development of real property. 
For developments consisting of: 
(1)  Less than 2 acres: As set by mayor and council. 
(2)  2—4.99 acres: As set by mayor and council. 
(3)  5—9.99 acres: As set by mayor and council. 
(4)  10 or more acres: As set by mayor and council. 
(5)  Additions to existing developments: As set by mayor and council. 
(6)  Utility installations: As set by mayor and council. 
(7)  Resubmittal of construction plans: As set by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(301), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-451—118-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 118-460. - Initial information. 
(a)  This division outlines procedures to be followed in order to comply with the requirements of this article. The developer, who initially may not be familiar with this article, must first consult with the administrative officer to obtain information concerning all ordinances affecting the proposed development. 
(b)  The administrative officer shall provide the developer with a copy of this article and any other ordinance governing the development. The developer may either review the article at city hall or he may purchase a copy for his subsequent use. 
(c)  The provisions of this article apply in addition to the provisions of the City Code of the City of Milner pertinent to subdivisions contained in section 114-1 et seq. In the event of a conflict between the two, the more stringent provision of either ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(401), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-461. - Required compliance with development regulations. 
(a)  Physical development. No developer may proceed with any construction work on a proposed development before obtaining construction plan approval and any and all required development permits. 
(b)  Use of plat. The transfer of, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat that has not been given a final certificate of approval by the city and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Lamar County is prohibited. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents does not exempt the transaction from this prohibition. 
(c)  Erection of building. No building permit will be issued, no building may be erected and no factory-manufactured building may be installed on any lot unless the street giving access to the lot has been approved in accordance with the provisions for the acceptance and dedication of streets by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(402), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-462. - Overview of construction plan procedures. 
Prior to making any street improvements or installing any utilities or other improvements, the developer must submit to the administrative officer construction plans of the proposed development prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article. The construction plans must show all street design profiles, topographic information, utility construction plans, sediment and erosion control plans, and other information as may be requested by the administrative officer. The construction plan stage requires the review and approval of only the administrative officer and any appropriate city departments. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(403), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-463. - Submission and approval of construction plans. 
(a)  Construction plan submission. Prior to certification of zoning and issuance of a building permit, a site plan must be approved for all construction, including expansions and additions. 
(b)  Format. Nine copies of the construction plans must be submitted to the administrative officer. The scale shall not be less than 50 feet to the inch. 
(c)  Planned development. Development to be constructed in phases must have complete construction documents for all phases. 
(d)  Review of construction plans. The developer shall contact the following departments of the city for plan review, as follows: 
(1)  City fire department; 
(2)  City engineer; 
(3)  Lamar County Health Department; 
(4)  Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation Office; and 
(5)  Water/sewer department. 
These agencies must approve or disapprove the construction plans within 21 working days of receipt. If the plans are disapproved, the developer shall be notified in writing of the reason for disapproval. Upon receipt of the revised plans, all agencies shall approve or disapprove the revised construction plans within 21 days of receipt. When the plans are approved, the administrative officer is authorized to issue a permits to permit the developer to commence construction. 
(e)  Compliance with permit regulation for wetlands. The developer shall submit documents to show that the proposed construction complies with the terms and conditions of nationwide permit regulations, as promulgated by Part 330, Appendix (c)(13)(d) of Regulations for Wetlands published in the Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 226, November 22, 1991, as amended. 
(f)  Suitability of land. Land on which there is a danger to health, safety or property will not be approved for a use that will continue or increase such danger, unless such hazards can be and are corrected. Examples of such conditions are: 
(1)  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion; 
(2)  Land with excessive slope or other physical constraints which make it unsuitable for development. 
(g)  Approval of construction plans. Approval of construction plans and issuance of a building permit constitutes authorization to proceed with the installation of any required improvements, subject to the approval of agencies having the proper authority over such individual improvements. 
(h)  Approval period. Approval of construction plans is valid for a period of two years. Any application for a building permit submitted after that time has lapsed will not be accepted. Construction plans should be resubmitted and should conform to the current adopted standards (as of the date of resubmittal) of the city. Review fees will apply on resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(404), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-464. - Specifications for construction plans. 
Construction plans must meet the minimum standards of design set forth in this section and must include the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the construction plans, giving the name, address and telephone number of the developer submitting the plan; 
(2)  Name and location of the development; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and seal of engineer preparing the plan; 
(4)  Vicinity map; 
(5)  Date, scale, north arrow and number of sheets; 
(6)  Zoning of property; 
(7)  Zoning of adjoining property; 
(8)  Location and dimensions of all existing structures (principal and accessory); 
(9)  Locations and dimensions of all proposed structures (principal and accessory) and proposed uses; 
(10)  Rights-of-way, pavement edges, centerlines of roadways and all easements; 
(11)  Minimum yards and setbacks specified in the zoning ordinance; 
(12)  Exits, entrances, internal circulation patterns showing traffic lanes, fire lanes and acceleration/deceleration lanes, and streets and driveways on both sides of the street within 100 feet of a property line; 
(13)  Parking layout, including handicapped parking and landscaping; 
(14)  Required landscape areas, buffers and screening; 
(15)  Off-street loading; 
(16)  Location of refuse collection and any outside storage and/or service areas, and how such refuse and storage areas will be screened; 
(17)  Signs; 
(18)  Field run or aerial topographic map referenced to a datum of mean sea level with contour intervals not to exceed two feet; 
(19)  Water and sanitary sewer plans (if applicable) which comply with all city sewer system standards; 
(20)  A specification chart on the plans with all pipe gauges and other pertinent specifications; 
(21)  Site grading plan with soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District office standards; 
(22)  The 100-year floodplain must be depicted accurately and bear the certification of a registered professional engineer or professional surveyor and the sources of all data shall be identified on the plan. 
(23)  Hydrology study. 
a.  Hydrology study will be required for storm frequencies of two, five, ten, 25, 50 and 100 years. Studies shall include pertinent hydrographs, drainage maps, and outlet structures (plan and profile views). 
b.  Detention is required for storm frequencies of two, five, ten, 25 and 100 years. No additional runoff will be allowed over the predeveloped rate. All detention facilities shall be fenced with a cyclone fence a minimum of six feet in height. Potential access to detention facilities shall be provided by means of a 15-foot minimum width fence gate, latched and locked five or more feet above grade, a 15-foot minimum width easement to a public right-of-way. 
c.  Detention requirement for any development located adjacent to a watercourse with drainage basin significantly larger than the area proposed for development may include a required "timing study" analysis. If required, such study must comply with the guidelines set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual utilizing acceptable methods for determining flow path time and hydrographs. HEC-1 models must be utilized to produce hydrographs of the site and basin for use in determining peak flow rates at the study point determined to be the critical point of study. The ten percent rule outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual should be utilized in studying the downstream impact of development and reported in the study. A predesign meeting will be required before plans or a study is developed and submitted for review. 
(24)  Total area of the property; 
(25)  Area to be developed; 
(26)  Area of impervious surface; 
(27)  Percentage of impervious surface; and 
(28)  Locate all viable trees over eight inches in diameter on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(405), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-465. - Specification for construction plans for expansion/addition to existing commercial or industrial sites. 
Construction plans for expansions and/or additions to existing commercial or industrial sites, which do not expand or add more than 5,000 square feet of impervious surface and do not add additional or multiple stories must meet the minimum standards of design set forth in this article and must include the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of the construction plans for the expansion or addition, giving the name; address and telephone number of the developer submitting the plan; 
(2)  Name and location of the development; 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number and seal of person preparing the plan for expansion or addition; 
(4)  Date, scale, north arrow and number of sheets; 
(5)  Locations and dimensions of all existing structures (principal and accessory); 
(6)  Location and dimensions of the proposed expansion or addition; 
(7)  Minimum yards and setbacks specified in the zoning ordinance; 
(8)  Exits, entrances, internal circulation patterns showing traffic lanes, fire lanes and acceleration/deceleration lanes, only if being modified or changes as a result of the expansion or addition; 
(9)  Parking layout, including handicapped parking and landscaping, only if being modified or changes as a result of the expansion or addition; 
(10)  Off-street loading, only if being modified or changes as a result of the expansion or addition; 
(11)  Location of refuse collection and any outside storage and/or service areas, and how such refuse and storage areas will be screened, only if being modified or changed as a result of the expansion or addition; 
(12)  Water and sanitary sewer plans (if applicable) which comply with all city development standards, only if being modified or changes as a result of the expansion or addition; 
(13)  A specification chart on the plans with all pipe gauges and other pertinent specifications; and 
(14)  Site grading plan with soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(406), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-466. - Other required plans. 
The following may be submitted with a site plan or may be submitted separately; however, no clearing, grubbing or grading shall be undertaken until a land disturbance permit has been approved and visibly posted at the primary point of access to the property: 
(1)  Building plans (four sets); 
(2)  Landscape, buffer and screening plan (nine sets); 
(3)  Grading and soil erosion plan (nine sets); 
(4)  Hydrological study (two sets); 
(5)  Water and sewer plan (nine sets); 
(6)  Sign plan (three sets); and 
(7)  Facade elevations (three sets for city use or eight sets if review by the mayor and council is requested. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(407), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-467. - Development standards for utility installations. 
(a)  Utility easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than street rights-of-way, easements must be shown on the plat for utility purposes. Such easements must not be less than 20 feet wide and, where possible, must be centered on rear or side lot lines. All utility easements shall comply with the minimum standards as specified by the utility provider. 
(b)  Water supply systems. 
(1)  Public water system. If available, the proposed development must be connected to a public water supply and water mains, fire hydrants and stub connections must be shown on the construction plans. 
(2)  Private water supply system. If public water supply is not available, the developer may install a private water system developed according to plans and specifications shown on the approved construction plans and approved by the city. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer disposal systems. 
(1)  Public sewage system. If available, the proposed development must be connected to a public sewage system and sewage mains and stub connections must be shown on the construction plans. If a lift station is required the developer must pay the cost of the station. 
(2)  Individual sewage system. When a public sewage system is not available the developer must carefully consider the capability and suitability of the general area of the property to support an individual sewage system (septic tanks). Such proposed sewage system must be approved by the Lamar County Health Department. The city must consider the recommendation of the Lamar County Health Department regarding any proposed private sewage systems in approval of the construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(408), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-468. - Development standards for drainage facilities. 
(a)  Watercourse and drainage easements. Where a proposed development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or stream, appropriate provisions must be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed development. Such an easement must conform substantially with the lines of the watercourse and be wide enough and of adequate construction to be satisfactory for the purpose. 
(b)  Detention facility maintenance. 
(1)  The stormwater detention storage capacity or function of any detention basin, pond or other impoundment, whether natural of manmade, shall not be removed or diminished without the city's express approval. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the operational characteristics of any stormwater detention facility construction in the development pursuant to the requirements of this article and/or any other regulation enacted by the city for such purpose, and to maintain the detention facility free of obstruction, silt or debris. The detention facility perimeter must be fenced with six-foot-high fence. 
(3)  A certified record survey of each detention facility shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia. A certified record drawing of the facility shall be prepared based upon the survey. Based on the actual parameters established on the record drawing, an addendum to the stormwater management report shall be prepared which demonstrates that the facility, as constructed, complies with the requirements of this article and/or any other regulation enacted by the city for such purpose. The amendment stormwater management report shall be certified by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accordance with the provisions of Georgia law. Such certification shall substantially comply with the following form: 
Detention Pond Certification Form 
Date: ________ 
To: CITY OF MILNER BUILDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT 
Project Name: ___________ 
Designed Storage Volume: ___________ 
As Built Storage Volume: ___________ 
(Provide 8½ × 11 drawing of designed outlet structure and as build outlet structure.) 
By placing my professional stamp and signature hereon, I certify that this detention pond is constructed according to the approved design on file with the City of Milner and on record at the City of Milner Building Inspection Department. I further certify that all the drainage area designed to drain to this pond in fact does drain to said pond and the outflow from the pond is equal to or less than the maximum allowable outflow for the 10 and 100 year storm events. Calculations to determine the as-built storage volume shall be maintained by me and provided to City of Milner in the event they are needed by City of Milner to verify this volume capacity. 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(409), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-469. - Development standards for driveway entrances. 
Driveway construction for commercial/industrial developments adjoining a city or county road shall consist of six inches of DOT 3000 PSI concrete or the specifications illustrated in exhibit "A", attached hereto. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(410), 11-16-2009) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A, as referenced above, is on file with the offices of the city. 
Sec. 118-470. - Certifications. 
The following certificates shall be inscribed on the construction plans: 
(1)  Engineer. 
I hereby certify that the engineering requirements for these construction documents as prescribed by the Commercial/Industrial Development Ordinance of the City of Milner, Georgia, have been fulfilled. 
___________(Name)  Registered Professional Engineer No._______ 
Date: ________ 
(2)  Administrative officer. 
I hereby certify that this construction plan was approved by the City of Milner, Georgia on ________ (date). 
___________(Name)  Administrative officer 
(3)  Property owner. 
I hereby understand that approval of this construction plan is valid for a period of two years. Any application for a building permit submitted after the time has lapsed shall not be accepted. Construction plans should be resubmitted and should conform to the current adopted standards (as of the date of resubmittal) of the City of Milner, Georgia. Review fees will apply. 
___________(Name)  Property owner 
Date: ________ 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(411), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-471. - Site plan revisions. 
Any deviation or revisions from approved site and/or construction plans must be shown on revised site and/or construction plans approved by the administrative officer. Changes shall be authorized in writing on the revised site and/or construction plans by the administrative officer. A copy of the revised plan(s) shall be retained by the administrative officer for inclusion in the development file. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(412), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-472. - Certificate of occupancy. 
In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be issued by the administrative officer unless an as-built condition is reflected on approved site and/or development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(413), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-473—118-479. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ARCHITECTURAL AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 118-480. - Objectives. 
In order to maintain high quality, long-lasting and sustainable commercial/industrial development within the city, the city adopts design criteria for all newly constructed nonresidential buildings, intended to encourage an "old town" look and feel of historic Georgia villages. The guidelines in this division will foster architectural diversity and interest, yet achieve and maintain a consistent, durable and pleasing aesthetic/visual quality. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(501), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-481. - Building materials. 
The use of a common palate of building materials should be maintained for all building facades to create a consistent and traditional architectural identity. Traditional architecture includes the use of brick, pitched roofs, low-profile signage and subdued colors. For large commercial/industrial retail buildings, variations in facade, roofline and depth shall be provided to lend the appearance of multi-tenant occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(502), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-482. - Facade elevation criteria. 
(a)  Facade elevations shall be submitted as a part of the request for approval of construction plans for the development. Facade elevations shall clearly indicate the proposed building materials and colors for each facade described therein. The plans shall clearly show the location and calculate the amount/percentage of all building materials included within each facade. 
(b)  Groups of buildings located within the development may be reviewed and approved as a single development, rather than as individual buildings. Grouping of buildings is encouraged to minimize the number of reviews required and to allow for originality and design flexibility. 
(c)  Allowed building materials. The following facade materials shall be allowed: 
(1)  Facades visible to a public street: Brick, stone, split faced concrete masonry unit (CMU), cement plank (Hardy Plank) siding, glass, stucco as exterior finish properly installed with appropriate vapor barrier. 
(2)  Facades not visible to a public street: Painted concrete block, painted formed concrete or prefabricated metal panel. 
(3)  Any building material allowed may be used in any percentage throughout the building. 
(d)  Accent/trim exterior building materials: Small amounts of building materials such as wood, tile, stucco, etc., may be used to enhance the elevation of the building or for decorative elements, not exceeding ten percent of the total wall area per facade. Neon tubing or similarly shaped light fixture is not an acceptable accent/trim building material. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(503), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-483. - Roof requirements. 
(a)  Pitched roofs. All one-story buildings less than 10,000 gross square feet must have a pitched roof between 4:12 and 12:12. If a pitched roof is not possible, a combination of flat roof and pitched roof is required, providing a pitched roof on the front and side of the building to screen any flat portion of the roof from view. The development may include arcades, drive-under canopies, porches and other features with the pitched roof. Materials for pitched roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt shingles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory-finished sheet metal. 
(b)  Mansard roofs. Mansard roofs shall have a maximum pitch of 12:12 with a minimum six feet vertical surface length. 
(c)  Flat roofs. Flat roofs may be of any material that meets the City's Code. Exposed metal flashing shall be copper or factory-finished sheet metal. If factory-finished metal flashing is used, such as standing seam, the color must be an earth tone to blend with other materials or of a color to simulate weathered copper or bronze. All buildings with flat roofs should include parapet articulation on the front facade thereof. Roof articulations/offsets shall be at a minimum of one per each 125 linear feet of length by a change in the top line of the parapet. Additional articulation may occur at any lesser distance. If the front facade is less than 125 linear feet, a minimum of one roof articulation must be present. 
(d)  Other. Drive-under canopies for gasoline pumps shall have a pitched roof consistent with the pitched roof material requirements in paragraph (a), above. The materials, ratio and color of the gas canopies' pitched roof shall be consistent with any associated primary structure. Where a full pitch is not possible, a hip roof may be provided. In such situations, a minimum 3:12 roof pitch shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(504), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-484. - Arcade/structural canopy—Retail use. 
A covered arcade/structural canopy shall be provided along the front facade of each multi-tenant commercial shopping or strip center. Arcades are covered walkways connected to or separate from the principal building. Arcades/canopies must be designed in a manner which provides architectural depth to the building and includes covered areas for relief from the weather. The arcade/canopy must be a minimum of five feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(505), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-485. - Vents/HVAC and other equipment. 
All mechanical equipment, including meters, rooftop equipment, fan units and vents shall be placed on a non-street side or screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(506), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-486. - Temporary buildings. 
Temporary buildings or mobile buildings, including, but not limited to, trailers, campers, recreational vehicles and tents, shall not be allowed within public view with the exception of authorized dealerships of such buildings and temporary trailers associated with approved developments. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(507), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-487. - Buildings in excess of 30,000 square feet. 
For single-story commercial or industrial buildings exceeding 30,000 square feet of heated space, the following design criteria apply in addition to those listed above: 
(1)  Facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plan projections or recesses having a depth of at least three percent of the length of the facade and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet. 
(2)  Ground-floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than 60 percent of their horizontal length. 
(3)  Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the following elements: color change, texture change, material change, or expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plan no less than 24 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(508), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-488. - Energy conservation. 
Construction of all structures shall comply with the requirements of the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(509), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-489—118-499. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OVERLAY DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 118-500. - Objectives. 
In order to maintain high quality, long-lasting and sustainable commercial development within the downtown development authority ("DDA") overlay district, the city adopts additional architectural design criteria for all newly constructed nonresidential buildings, as well as any substantial renovations of existing structures located therein. The additional architectural design criteria are intended to encourage and further enhance the "old town" look and feel of city's commercial village. To the extent the provisions of this division may conflict with other requirements of this article, the provisions of this division shall control development within the DDA overlay district. Examples of structures which, if constructed, satisfy the interest of this division are shown in photographs, attached hereto as exhibit "B" and which are incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(601), 11-16-2009) 
Editor's note— Exhibit B, as referenced above, is on file with the offices of the city. 
Sec. 118-501. - Substantial renovation. 
The purpose of this division, "substantial renovation" shall mean any modification or repair to an existing structure, the cost for which equals at least 50 percent of the fair market value of the existing structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(602), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-502. - Maximum square footage. 
The maximum heated square footage of any structure shall not exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(603), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-503. - Building height. 
No building shall exceed 30 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(604), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-504. - Location of buildings and sidewalks. 
Any new building or structure which fronts on Main Street shall be constructed along Main Street not to exceed more than 60 feet from the centerline, so long as consistent with the location of existing buildings. The developer shall also construct a sidewalk at the front of each building from the right-of-way to front facade thereof of at least ten feet in width, so long as consistent with that of adjoining structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(605), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-505. - Roofs. 
Roofs on each building shall slope from front to back, with the front roofline being hidden by a false architectural facade on the building. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(606), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-506. - Building materials/color. 
All building architectural plans, along with material and paint samples shall be submitted to the downtown development authority for approval consistent with the provisions of this division. The downtown development authority shall notify the administrative officer of compliance before any building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(607), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-507. - Building materials permitted on side walls. 
Any side wall visible to the public shall be constructed of brick, stone, split-faced concrete masonry unit (CMU), cement plank (hardy plank) siding, glass, stucco as exterior finish, properly installed with appropriate vapor barrier. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(608), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-508. - Doors/windows. 
All doors and windows shall be composed of wood or color anodized aluminum. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(609), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-509. - Utilities. 
All utilities shall be located underground. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(610), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-510. - Utility fixtures/on-site loading and storage. 
All loading docks and utility fixtures must be located at the rear of any structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(611), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-511. - Energy conservation. 
Construction of all structures shall comply with the requirements of the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(612), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-512—118-519. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT/VARIANCE 

Sec. 118-520. - Alternate review. 
Requests to vary the requirements of this article or the request for approval of alternative design proposals must be approved by the mayor and council at a public meeting. The city may require additional information, including, but not limited to, presentation of material samples and facade mock-ups in order to determine whether the alternative proposal satisfies the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(701), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-521. - Administrative modifications. 
In the event the intent of this division can be achieved with only minor deviations from the express provisions contained herein which do not substantially impact the goals or intent of this article, the administrative officer may modify the specific provisions. The mayor and council may, as part of any approval of any plan submitted pursuant to this division, impose conditions, modifications or additional requirements as necessary to mitigate any part of the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(702), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-522. - Appeals and variances. 
Appeals and variances from the requirements of this article shall be brought pursuant to the procedures set forth in article II of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(703), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-523. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any amendment hereto, or who fails to perform any act required hereunder or commits any prohibited act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each and every day for which any violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(704), 11-16-2009) 
Secs. 118-524—118-529. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OVERLAY ZONE MAP 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE  PRIOR CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the prior Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE  ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances not included in the Prior Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 
Sec. 118-530. - Downtown development authority overlay zone map. 
The official downtown development authority overlay zone map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. Any reference to the downtown development authority overlay zone map refers thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(801), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-531. - Identification of the official map. 
The official downtown development authority overlay zone map is signed by the mayor and bears the seal of the city or that of a notary public under the following words: "This certifies that this is the official downtown development authority overlay zone map, referred to in division 8 of the "Commercial/Industrial Development Ordinance of the City of Milner, Georgia," together with the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(802), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-532. - Amendment to the official map. 
The modification or amendment to the official downtown development authority overlay zone map is an amendment to the article. The procedure by which amendments are proposed and approved is set forth in article II of the city's zoning ordinance. Any amendment must be entered onto the official map as soon as the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(803), 11-16-2009) 
Sec. 118-533. - Display of the official map. 
The official downtown development authority overlay zone map shall be on display in the office of the administrative officer, and the official map is the final authority regarding the status of the downtown development authority overlay zone's boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 2009-3, § 1(804), 11-16-2009) 