THE CODE OF THE CITY OF LOGANVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: April 9, 2009 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LOGANVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ray Nunley (Mayor) 
Pedro Vega 
Mark Kiddoo 
Jerry Price 
Michael Lynch 
Wendell Geiger 
Eileen Waring 
City Council 
____________ 
Bill Jones 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robyn Webb 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kristi Ash 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code as supplemented through June 28, 2001, and subsequent ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate in the Code any section any of the 1994 Code as supplemented through June 28, 2001, and any ordinance included therein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes that refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Robyn Webb, City Attorney, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Loganville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Loganville, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF LOGANVILLE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LOGANVILLE HEREBY ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 119, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 8, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense, and with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 8, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
Adopted this 9th day of April 2009. 
  


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
To reincorporate and provide a new charter for the City of Loganville in the counties of Walton and Gwinnett; to provide for the corporate limits of the city; to provide for the powers of the city; to provide for the form and method of government of the city; to provide for the administration of city affairs; to provide for the municipal court of the city; to provide for the elections for city offices; to provide for taxation by the city and the financial management of the city; to provide for bonds, ordinances, and pending matters; to provide for practices, procedures, powers, duties, and authority; to provide for employees and officers of the city; to provide for penalties; to provide for related matters; to provide an effective date; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in subpart A is the city Charter, being 1988 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 1081), page 4827. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, and catchlines have been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Loganville in the counties of Walton and Gwinnett is reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name of the "City of Loganville." References in this Charter to "the city" or "this city" refer to the City of Loganville. The city shall have perpetual existence. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter. Alterations of the boundaries of the city may be made from time to time in a manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city at all times shall be shown on a map to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Loganville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. 
(b)  The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of the city shall include, but are not limited to, the following powers: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxation: to levy, assess, and collect ad valorem taxes on all taxable property in the city; 
(2)  Other taxes: to levy, assess, and collect other taxes allowed by general law; 
(3)  Business regulation and taxation: to levy, assess, and collect occupational and business taxes and to license and regulate occupations and businesses; 
(4)  Appropriations: to make appropriations and expend funds for support of the city and any other lawful purpose; 
(5)  Municipal debts: to borrow money and issue bonds as authorized by general law; 
(6)  Property: to own property and interest in property; 
(7)  Gifts: to accept gifts and grants for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city on such terms as the donor may impose; 
(8)  Condemnation: to condemn property inside or outside the city for present or future use; 
(9)  Municipal utilities: to acquire, lease, operate, and dispose of public utilities; 
(10)  Public utilities: to grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and to prescribe the conditions of such franchises and contracts; 
(11)  Roadways: to open, maintain, improve, and close streets and roads and to grant franchises and rights-of-way thereon; 
(12)  Public facilities: to acquire, operate, and dispose of public buildings, public projects, parks, cemeteries, golf courses, and other public improvements inside or outside the city; 
(13)  Sidewalk maintenance: to require real-estate owners to repair and maintain sidewalks adjoining their land; 
(14)  Building regulation: to regulate the building trades and the construction of buildings and to adopt and enforce building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating, and air conditioning codes; 
(15)  Planning and zoning: to provide for city planning by zoning, subdivision regulation, and the like; 
(16)  Police power: to exercise the police power for the public safety and well-being of the city; 
(17)  Roadside regulation: to prohibit or regulate signs, billboards, and other items upon or adjacent to streets and roads; 
(18)  Health: to prescribe and enforce health and sanitation standards; 
(19)  Pollution: to regulate emissions which pollute the air and water; 
(20)  Fire safety: to fix fire limits and to prescribe and enforce fire-safety regulations; 
(21)  Public hazards: to provide for the destruction or removal of public hazards; 
(22)  Waste disposal: to provide for and regulate the collection, disposal, and recycling of garbage and wastes; 
(23)  Garbage fees: to fix and collect garbage fees; 
(24)  Sewer fees: to fix and collect sewer fees; 
(25)  Nuisances: to define and provide for the abatement of nuisances; 
(26)  Property protection: to preserve and protect the property of the city; 
(27)  Prisoners: to provide for public work by municipal prisoners and for their confinement; 
(28)  Animal control: to regulate or prohibit the keeping of animals; 
(29)  Motor vehicles: to regulate the operation and parking of motor vehicles; 
(30)  Taxicabs: to regulate vehicles operated for hire in the city; 
(31)  Pensions: to provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for city employees and officers; 
(32)  Special assessments: to levy, assess, and collect special assessments to cover the cost of public improvements; 
(33)  Contracts: to enter into lawful contracts and agreements; 
(34)  City agencies: to create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer appropriate authority upon them; 
(35)  Penalties: to provide penalties for violations of municipal ordinances; 
(36)  Police and fire protection: to exercise the power of arrest through appointed policemen and to operate a fire department; 
(37)  Emergencies: to provide for determining, proclaming, and combatting emergencies; 
(38)  Urban redevelopment: to organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(39)  Public transportation: to organize and operate public transportation systems; 
(40)  General health, safety, and welfare: to define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city; and 
(41)  Other powers: to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words or phrases granting powers. 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by the Constitution of Georgia, by general law, or by this Charter. If general law and this Charter make no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation; composition, number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this Charter. The mayor and council members who are in office on the effective date of this Charter shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Section 2.11. - Mayor and city council terms and qualification for office. 
The mayor and city councilmembers shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she is a qualified municipal voter. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless he or she is at least 18 years of age and has been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately prior to the date of his or her election. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor unless he or she is at least 21 years of age and has been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately prior to his or her election. The mayor and each councilmember shall continue to reside in the city during their period of service. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2009/elec. of 11-3-2009) 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  The office of mayor or council member shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or by the Constitution or general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term as provided for in Article V. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2012(1), § 3) 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Until changed as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and council members shall continue to receive the same compensation to which they were entitled immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter. 
(b)  The compensation of the mayor and council may be changed by ordinance and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, additional compensation may be provided by ordinance for the council member who serves as vice-mayor. Any ordinance providing for an increase in compensation shall be subject to Code Section 36-35-4 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or any similar law hereafter enacted. 
(c)  The mayor and council members shall be entitled, if authorized by the council, to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Section 2.14. - Holding other office. 
Except as authorized by general state law or other authorization by the council, the mayor or any council member shall not hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he or she was elected. 
Section 2.15. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interests of himself or herself or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign or authorized by council; 
(5)  Represent other private interest in any action or proceeding against the city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest or which would enrich any one's personal gain. 
(b)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any council member who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city of any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(e)  (1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in paragraph (1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to, or employment in, a position in the city government for a period of 12 months thereafter. 
Section 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.17. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the city as provided by Article I. 
Section 2.18. - Organization meeting. 
The city council shall meet as soon as practicable in January of each year for organization of the city government. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or council member as the case may be) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 137), page 4097, § 1) 
Section 2.19. - Regular meetings as prescribed and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence or in writing. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of all meetings shall be made as required by general state law. 
Section 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to remove members of any committee and the power to appoint new members to any committee, at any time, within the mayor's discretion. 
Section 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
Four council members and the mayor or vice-mayor shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the votes cast shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The mayor, or vice-mayor if presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
Section 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. Every ordinance shall begin with the enacting clause: "The Council of the City of Loganville hereby ordains. . . ." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(c)  Upon passage, all ordinances shall be signed by the mayor, or vice-mayor if presiding, and the city clerk. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the technical requirements of this section shall not invalidate an ordinance if the intention of the governing authority that the ordinance be effective is evident. 
Section 2.23. - Acts of city council. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law may be done by motion or resolution of the city council, except that any act of the city council to amend the charter or the code of ordinances or any other act required by general state law to be done by ordinance shall be done by ordinance. 
Section 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew, or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book, kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council and shall be published as soon as is practicable, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be published as soon as is practicable following its adoption, and the published ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
Section 2.27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(1), § 1, deleted § 2.27 entitled "Chief executive officer". 
Section 2.28. - Powers and duties of the mayor. 
As the chief executive of the city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and council and have the right to take part in the deliberations of said board, but shall not vote on any question except in the case of a tie; 
(2)  Sign all deeds and contracts, except deeds for property sold under execution at public sale; co-sign with city clerk; 
(3)  Co-sign, along with the city clerk, all checks for the payment of money, after payment of unpaid invoices, bills, and vouchers is approved by the mayor and council and approval for payment has been entered upon the minutes of the city; 
(4)  Be clothed with veto power as hereinafter set out; and 
(5)  Call the council together at any time allowed by this Charter. 
Section 2.29. - Vice-mayor. 
The city council shall elect each year by a majority vote from among its members a vice-mayor who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. 
Section 2.30. - Veto power. 
Every ordinance and resolution passed and every election of an officer or employee by the mayor and council shall be subject to the veto of the mayor in the following manner: The mayor shall within five days write out his objections to such resolution, ordinance, or election and the mayor and council shall, at the next regular or called meeting at which quorum shall be present, order said objections entered on the minutes and take a vote on the question as to whether said ordinance, resolution, or other action shall become adopted over said veto. Should as many as four council members vote in the affirmative, said resolution, ordinance, or other action shall stand affirmed and become effective without the approval of the mayor; otherwise, not. The ayes and nays shall in all cases be entered on the minutes. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(1), § 2, added new provisions (City Manager) designated as art. III, §§ 3.01—3.04. Sections 3—7 of said ordinance further renumbered and amended existing articles III—VII as articles IV—VIII as herein set out. 

Section 3.01. - Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. 
The council by a majority vote of its total members shall appoint a city manager and fix the manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 2) 
Section 3.02. - Removal. 
The council by a majority vote of its total members may remove the city manager, with or without cause, at a duly authorized public meeting. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 2) 
Section 3.03. - Acting City Manager. 
The city manager shall designate, in writing, a city officer or employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the manager's temporary absence or disability. The council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the City to serve until the city manager returns. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 2) 
Section 3.04. - Powers and Duties of the City Manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the City, responsible to the council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the manager's charge by or under this charter. The city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the City, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer subject to the manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all council meetings. The city manager shall have the right to take part in discussion but shall not vote; 
(4)  Endeavor to see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council; 
(6)  Submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City; and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the City as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the council. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 2) 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(1), § 3, amended and renumbered former art. III, §§ 3.10—3.15 as art. IV, §§ 4.10—4.15 as herein set out, see editors note, art. III. Former provisions derived from: 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1004), page 4657, § 1; 1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 137), page 4097, § 2; and Ord. of Feb. 9, 2012(2), §§ 3, 4. 

Section 4.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties of and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law or federal law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by the city council. 
(d)  There shall as the council directs be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director is subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor and council, or the city manager if one has been appointed, responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(e)  The mayor and council may, by ordinance, delegate its authority regarding the administrative affairs of the city unless such delegation is prohibited in this Charter or by the general laws or Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 3; Ord. of 7-14-2016) 
Section 4.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative functions as the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointed authority, term of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter, a local Act, or general state law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as specifically authorized by general law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by other local law, by general law, or by ordinance. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his or her office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by general state law, each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or general state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 3) 
Section 4.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by virtue of the position as city attorney. 
(b)  In the event the city attorney has a conflict of interest in representing the city on any particular matter or otherwise feels that he or she cannot adequately or properly represent the city, he or she shall so inform the city council and the city council shall be authorized to hire another attorney to represent the city in the matter in which the city attorney has disqualified himself or herself. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 3) 
Section 4.13. - City clerk. 
The city council may appoint a city clerk who shall not be a council member. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. In the event that the position of city manager is created as authorized by Section 3.04 of this Act, the city council may by ordinance abolish the position of city clerk and provide that the duties of the city clerk be performed by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 3) 
ARTICLE V. - JUDICIAL BRANCH[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See editor's note, article III. 

Section 5.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Loganville. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
Section 5.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by associate judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and is a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by mayor and council. 
(d)  Judges serve at the pleasure of the majority of the council. 
(e)  Before entering on the duties of his or her office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
Section 5.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as designated by ordinance or as provided by the mayor and council or as the presiding judge shall decide in order to meet the ends of justice. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
Section 5.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or 20 days in jail or as provided by state law. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 12 months or both or may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 12 months. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond of security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(h)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by general state law. All judges of the municipal court and the clerk of the municipal court are authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the city granted by general state law to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
Section 5.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Walton or Gwinnett County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
Section 5.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted should be filed with the city clerk, should be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy should be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 4) 
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— See editor's note, article III. 

Section 6.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." [Repealed. See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 5) 
Section 6.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers serving on the effective date of this Act shall remain in office until the normal expiration of their terms of office and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  Successors to those three councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 2009, shall be elected on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2009 for a term of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  Successors to the mayor and those three councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 2010, shall be elected on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2010 for a term of three years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  Successors to those three councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 2011, shall be elected on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2011 and every four years thereafter and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  Successors to the mayor and those three councilmembers whose terms expire December 31, 2013, shall be elected on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of 2013 and every four years thereafter and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)  The candidate for mayor who receives the largest number of votes cast in each election and the three candidates receiving the largest number of votes cast for the position of councilmember in each election shall be elected for terms of office as provided herein. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1004), page 4657, § 2; Ord. of 5-11-2009/elec. of 11-3-2009; Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 5) 
Section 6.12. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or council member shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office. However, if such a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the vice-mayor shall assume the office of mayor. If a vacancy occurs in the council within six months of the expiration of that term of office, then the position will remain vacant for the remainder of the term. However, if at any time there are more than two vacancies on the council and not enough time to have a special election, then the council shall fill the vacancies by majority vote. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." [Repealed. See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 5) 
Section 6.13. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party labels." 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 5) 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See editor's note, article III. 

Section 7.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general state law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 7.18. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 7.18. The city council, by ordinance, may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for garbage, sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and outside the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 7.18. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 7.18. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, allowing exceptions for hardship, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.21. - Short-term loans. 
Any short-term loan obtained by the city must be repaid by January 31 of the following year in which the loan was obtained unless otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.22. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall be from July 1 to June 30 or as the city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.23. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt and may thereafter amend an annual budget, except that the budget as finally adopted and amended must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of the fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such; and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations of allotments thereof to which it is chargeable unless by a majority vote of the city council. 
(d)  There shall be a yearly inventory of all city property required at the time the budget is approved. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.24. - Tax levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the budget, the city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.25. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council, by majority vote, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.26. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing cost to the public. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.27. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council minutes. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.28. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council may prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
Section 7.29. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as provided by general state law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city is of no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 6) 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(1), § 7, amended and renumbered former art. VII, §§ 7.10—7.14 as art. VIII, §§ 8.10—8.12 as herein set out, see editors note, art. III. 

Section 8.10. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 7) 
Section 8.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules, and regulations now in force in the City of Loganville not inconsistent with this Charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 7) 
Section 8.12. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue; and any such ongoing work or cases shall be dealt with by such city agencies, personnel, or office as may be provided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-10-2016(1), § 7) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is 1988 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1081), page 4827, as amended. 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location in the Charter of ordinances amending the Charter. 

 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - REDEVELOPMENT ACT[1] 
AN ACT 
To authorize the City of Loganville to exercise all redevelopment and other powers under Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(b) of the Constitution and Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as amended; to provide for a referendum; to provide effective dates; to provide for automatic repeal under certain circumstances; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 2007 Ga. Laws (Act No. 158), page 3788. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original.Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, and catchlines been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. This act was approved at referendum. 

Section 1. - [Redeveopment powers authorized.] 
The City of Loganville shall be and is authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers under Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as amended [O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1 et seq.]. The intention of this Act is to authorize the City of Loganville to undertake and carry out community redevelopment, to create tax allocation districts, to issue tax allocation bonds, and to incur other obligations within the meaning of and as fully permitted under the provisions of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(b) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as amended, and to authorize the City of Loganville to exercise redevelopment powers as fully as the "Redevelopment Powers Law" may now or hereafter permit and not to limit any redevelopment powers permitted under the "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
Section 2. - [Referendum.] 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of the City of Loganville shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Loganville for approval or rejection. The municipal election superintendent shall conduct that election on the regular November, 2007, municipal election date and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The municipal election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Gwinnett County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect immediately. If Section 1 of this Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Loganville. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
Editor's note— The act was approved by the voters in the 2007 election. 
Section 3. - [Effective date.] 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Section 4. - [Repealer.] 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location in the Related Laws of the various acts included therein. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 1994, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking, in writing, without seal, is sufficient. In all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, such obligors shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the city Charter. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
City council. The term "city council" means the City Council of the City of Logansville, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Gwinnett County, Georgia, Walton County, Georgia or both such counties. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Fees, rates and charges. Language providing that a fee, rate or charge is as established by the city means that such fee, rate or charge is as established by ordinance, resolution or any other formality not prohibited by law. Such language does not prohibit the council from lawfully delegating the authority to establish a fee, rate or charge. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular includes the plural. The plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
O.C.G.A., state act. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. Any reference to a "state act," whether by short title, year and page or year and act number, is to such act as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" is to be construed to mean seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, charter references, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1994, § 1-104) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, nor an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1994, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusions herein. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language:" Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section, chapter, article, division, subdivision not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered (insert number), that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1994, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "Sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(5)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1994, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), § 1, repealed § 2-18 entitled "Election", which derived from Code 1994, § 3-201. 
Sec. 2-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), § 2, repealed § 2-19 entitled "Qualifications for office", which derived from Code 1994, § 3-202. 
Sec. 2-20. - Meetings. 
(a)  Schedule. The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second Thursday of every month at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council. The city council shall hold work sessions on the Monday before the second Thursday of every month at 7:30 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council. The mayor may convene the council whenever in his opinion the public business requires it, and he shall do so upon the application of three members of the city council. All meetings at which official actions are to be taken shall be open to the public, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of all special or called meetings of the city council at which official actions are to be taken shall be given to the public by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least 24 hours prior to such meeting. Notice shall also be given to each councilmember individually by the city clerk. 
(c)  Duty to attend. It shall be the duty of each member of the city council to attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(Code 1994, § 3-203) 
State Law reference— Public meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-21. - Standing committees. 
The following shall be the standing committees of the city council: 
(1)  Finance. 
(2)  Human resources. 
(3)  Parks and green space. 
(4)  Planning and development. 
(5)  Public safety and transportation. 
(6)  Public utilities. 
(Code 1994, § 3-206; Ord. of 3-8-2007) 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), § 3, repealed § 2-46 entitled "General authority", which derived from Code 1994, § 3-301. 
Sec. 2-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), § 4, repealed § 2-47 entitled "Duties", which derived from Code 1994, § 3-302. 
Sec. 2-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), § 5, repealed § 2-48 entitled "Powers", which derived from Code 1994, § 3-303. 
Sec. 2-49. - Vice-mayor. 
The city council shall elect each year by a majority vote from among its members a vice-mayor who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. 
(Code 1994, § 3-304; Ord. of 3-10-2016(2), § 6) 
Editor's note— Retitled as herein set out by § 6 of an ordinance adopted Mar. 10, 2016(2), formerly entitled "Mayor pro tempore." 
Sec. 2-50. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor the council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. 
(Code 1994, § 3-305) 
Secs. 2-51—2-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPEACHMENT AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 2-74. - Grounds for removal. 
The mayor or any councilmember shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by Charter or by law; 
(4)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of the municipal Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by Charter or by law. 
(Code 1994, § 2-401) 
Sec. 2-75. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of any elected officer from office shall be brought about in the following manner: 
(1)  Initiation of proceedings. Any person desiring to initiate removal proceedings against an elected officer shall file a complaint in writing with the city clerk, which complaint shall set forth distinctly the alleged ground or grounds for removal and the names of witnesses, if any. 
(2)  Preliminary hearing. Immediately upon receipt of a complaint, as provided for in subsection (1) of this section, the city clerk shall notify the mayor (except in case of his own impeachment, when the clerk shall then notify the mayor pro tem) who shall call a meeting of the city council. If, at such meeting, a majority of the council shall deem the complaint sufficient to authorize an investigation, they shall call, at the earliest date practicable, a meeting for the trial of the officer complained of. 
(3)  Articles of impeachment and notice. If a trial is ordered as provided in subsection (2) of this section, it shall be the duty of the city attorney to immediately draw articles of impeachment, based upon the complaint, which shall be filed with the city clerk at least five days prior to the date set for the trial. Upon receipt of the articles of impeachment it shall be the duty of the city clerk to attach to the same a notice directed to the party complained against, which notice shall specify the time and place of the trial and command the appearance of the accused. The notice and copy shall be served upon the accused by a police officer at least seven days before the date of trial. 
(4)  Conduct of trial. The trial shall be conducted in the manner employed by the courts, both the council and the accused having the right to introduce evidence and be represented by counsel, it being the duty of the city attorney to act a prosecuting officer in such trials. 
(5)  Verdict and judgment. The council shall render a verdict upon each article of impeachment, to be followed by the judgment, which shall be entered by the city attorney upon the original articles and signed by the mayor or other presiding officer. Such verdict and judgment shall be placed upon the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-402) 
Sec. 2-76. - Appeal of decision. 
Any officer removed from office by the action of city council as provided in section 2-75 shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the superior court of the county in which the city hall is located. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the court of probate. 
(Code 1994, § 2-403) 
Secs. 2-77—2-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-96. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before the Walton County probate judge or other authorized person: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will in all respects, observe the provisions of the Constitution of the United States of America, the State of Georgia, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Loganville; and I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of ____________ , so help me God. 
(Code 1994, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-97. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the city council may require any department head, city official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the city council. The bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of such duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations, or unlawful expenditures in office. The surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the city council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-98. - Compensation. 
Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1994, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-99. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Department heads. All department heads should: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit monthly and annual reports of the activities of their respective departments to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of department activities and to form a basis for the period reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the city manager, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(b)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(Code 1994, § 3-103) 
Secs. 2-100—2-126. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-127. - Bond and oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city manager shall take an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance of his duties and shall execute a bond payable to the city in the sum of $50,000.00 for the faithful accounting of all funds belonging to the city that come into his hands. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 3-502) 
Sec. 2-128. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall have the power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Hire and discharge for cause all employees of the city not authorized to be appointed or elected by city council, provided that such power to appoint or discharge may be delegated to any other official or employee by the city manager; 
(2)  Fill all appointive offices of the city, except where otherwise provided by law, and to report such appointments or removals to the city council as soon as possible after the action is taken; 
(3)  Supervise and direct the official conduct of all appointive city officers; 
(4)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the city, except where otherwise provided by law; 
(5)  Attend all meetings of the city council with the right to take part in all discussions but not to vote; 
(6)  Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary and expedient; 
(7)  Keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the city, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts; 
(8)  Keep the councilmembers fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(9)  Fix all salaries and compensation of city employees lawfully employed by him, subject to the approval of the council; 
(10)  Examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party, and sign on behalf of the city any contract when authorized by the mayor, excepting where the council directs that some other office or officers shall do so; 
(11)  Supervise the performance of all contracts made for work done for the city; 
(12)  Make all purchases of supplies, material and equipment for the city and see that the same are received as contracted for provided that if a purchase in excess of $5,000.00 is involved, prior approval of city council shall be necessary, and opportunity for competitive bids shall be given after reasonable advertisement thereof; 
(13)  Conduct all sales which the council may authorize of personal property of the city which has become unnecessary or unfit for the city to use; 
(14)  Keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city and its location; 
(15)  See to the publication of all notices, ordinances, or other documents required by law to be published; 
(16)  Prepare for the election officials all notices, ballots, and election supplies necessary in connection with municipal elections; 
(17)  Prepare and maintain all personnel records for the city; 
(18)  Develop and submit to the city council for approval a job classification and pay plan; 
(19)  Establish a system for employee grievance resolution; 
(20)  Advise the mayor and city council on all matters affecting the physical, social, and cultural growth and development of the city when requested or required to do so; 
(21)  Undertake research studies and prepare a master plan or parts thereof for area renewal, conservation, rehabilitation development, or redevelopment; 
(22)  Prepare, recommend, and assist other departments of the city in the development of specific projects intended to complement the master plan; 
(23)  Prepare and recommend for adoption zoning and subdivision regulations; 
(24)  Maintain the official map and keep it up to date; 
(25)  Cooperate with the municipal planning commission and all other departments and boards of the city in carrying out its responsibilities; 
(26)  Exercise such other powers and duties as are delegated to him from time to time by the city council; and 
(27)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code, or required by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 3-503; Ord. of 2-13-2003(1)) 
Secs. 2-129—2-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK/FINANCE DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-156. - Term. 
The city clerk shall hold his office until a vacancy shall occur. The city clerk shall hold his office, subject to removal for cause, until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1994, §§ 3-401, 3-402; Ord. of 9-14-2000) 
Sec. 2-157. - Duties as city clerk and finance director. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee shall have the following duties in his capacity as city clerk: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of city council together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose; 
(3)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and city council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(4)  To issue all licenses, and keep a record thereof, and all badges and permits authorized by the council; 
(5)  To issue all summonses, processes, and subpoenas to witnesses that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council; 
(6)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; and 
(7)  To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office. 
(b)  The director of finance shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and keep all financial records of the city; 
(2)  To make all purchases of materials, supplies, or equipment for the city which are authorized by the council, in the manner provided by law and subject to the limitations imposed by law; 
(3)  To keep a current account of the amount appropriated each year and the sums spent out of each appropriation showing the unexpended balance for each item; 
(4)  To keep in proper books a full and accurate account of all the moneys received and disbursed by him in behalf of the city, specifying the date of receipt and disbursement, from whom received and to whom disbursed, and on what account received and disbursed, and how paid; 
(5)  To prepare and keep for the city clerk all bond registers and other records required by law to be kept by the city clerk, and to prepare for signature and publication the annual clerk's report and any other report required by law; 
(6)  To receive and have custody of all moneys paid to the city and to disburse city moneys as provided by law; 
(7)  To receive and collect all license fees, permit fees, charges for the use of city property or special services rendered by the city, sums due the city on any contract, and all other sums due the city other than those which are by law paid directly to another municipal officer; and 
(8)  To perform any and all such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the mayor of council. 
(Code 1994, § 3-404) 
Sec. 2-158. - Records management. 
(a)  City Hall is responsible for records management activities and the city clerk is designated to act for and in behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(b)  "Retention Schedules for Local Government Records", as promulgated by the Archives, Records and Information Management Section, Georgia Secretary of State, effective April 1, 2005, as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as the minimum retention schedules for public records of the city. 
(c)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city clerk which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Code 1994, § 3-405; Ord. of 3-10-2016(2), § 7) 
Secs. 2-159—2-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR OFFICIALS OF THE GOVERNING AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 11, 2012(1), renamed div. 4 as set out herein. Formerly entitled "Code of Ethics for Elected and Appointed Officials". 

Sec. 2-185. - Preamble. 
(a)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. 
(b)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only; and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. 
(c)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security, and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it. 
(d)  The people have the right to expect that every public official will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence and a respect for the government he represents. 
(e)  Such confidence and respect can be best promoted if every public official, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly: 
(1)  Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness, and equality under the law; and 
(2)  Avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, preamble) 
Sec. 2-186. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policies be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
(b)  Purpose. This Code has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners that affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(c)  Nonapplicability. The provisions of this division shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, art. I) 
Sec. 2-187. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or vice-mayor containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Crime involving moral turpitude means that definition established by the court of appeals and the supreme court of the state. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods and services in the normal course of business for which the member has been paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-2) 
Sec. 2-188. - Penalty. 
Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this division, except as listed in section 2-192, shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-11) 
Sec. 2-189. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-1) 
Sec. 2-190. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for writ of certiorari in the superior court of Walton County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-12) 
Sec. 2-191. - Prohibitions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties. This subsection shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is in direct conflict with the proper discharge of official duties. This prohibition shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-193 are made to the board or commission chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereinafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(7)  Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his position in any way to coerce another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or persons having an interest. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-3) 
Sec. 2-192. - Criminal acts. 
(a)  A conviction, plea of guilty, nolo contendere, guilty under the provision of Alford v. North Carolina , or under the O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq. or any federal statute, to any charge involving moral turpitude by a member of the governing authority shall constitute a breach of ethics as defined herein. Upon conviction or plea as enumerated in this subsection, a complaint shall be brought by the city attorney as provided in section 2-197 and shall proceed before the board of ethics as required by this division. 
(b)  After review of the findings of the board of ethics, the governing authority may take whatever steps it deems appropriate, including but not limited to: censure, reprimand, suspension, or expulsion from the governing body. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-3.1) 
Sec. 2-193. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion or voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the city council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-4) 
Sec. 2-194. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-5) 
Sec. 2-195. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city attorney following disclosure. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-6) 
Sec. 2-196. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-7) 
Sec. 2-197. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation may file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the vice-mayor, who shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the vice-mayor, shall appoint three members of the council, who, along with the city attorney, acting ex officio, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(c)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(d)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the mayor and council have not prescribed such forms. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-8; Ord. of 10-11-2012(1), § 2) 
Sec. 2-198. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics. 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor shall designate three members and the councilmembers shall each designate one qualified citizen to provide a pool of nine individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city clerk shall maintain a listing of these nine qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the city council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this division and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this division; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-9) 
Sec. 2-199. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints; member rights. 
(a)  The board of ethics as appointed herein shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable, but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a written, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the opportunity to take testimony and to cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be transcribed by a certified Georgia Court Reporter. The board of ethics shall not be bound to adhere to statutory rules of evidence, but shall be fundamentally fair and reasonable in its administration of evidence. The standard of evidence sufficient to prove a violation in a hearing of the board of ethics shall be by a preponderance of the evidence admitted at the hearing. The city attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the board of ethics, if requested by the board of ethics. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the city council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of the inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before the hearing; to be represented by counsel, licensed in the State of Georgia, of his or her choosing; to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. The member or his or her counsel, if any, shall have an opportunity to: 
(1)  Challenge the sufficiency of any complaint which has been filed against him or her; 
(2)  Examine all documents and records obtained or prepared by the board in connection with the matter heard; 
(3)  Bring witnesses and/or request the board subpoena witnesses and/or documents; 
(4)  Establish all pertinent facts and circumstances; 
(5)  Question or refute testimony or evidence, including the opportunity to confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses; and 
(6)  Exercise, to the extent the board, in its discretion, determines to be just and reasonable, any discovery procedure usually available in civil actions. 
(c)  The board of ethics, in addition to its other duties and powers, may: 
(1)  Appoint a hearing officer to conduct hearings in the place of the board chairperson; and 
(2)  When necessary, retain outside legal counsel and, as needed, other experts upon approval by the city of a contract for services. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2001, § 2-8-10; Ord. of 10-11-2012(1), § 3) 
Secs. 2-200—2-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-222. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments and heads thereof: 

 
(Code 1994, § 3-701) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1, 2, 4 and 5 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 2012, amended ch. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 4, §§ 4-1—4-134, pertained to pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1994, § 18-235; Ord. of Feb. 14, 2008, §§ 18-201—18-245; Ord. of Dec. 10, 2009, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Nov. 8, 2010(1), § 1. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcohol generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of the ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes, but is not limited to, all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Applicant means an individual who files an application to obtain any license authorized by this chapter and: 
(1)  If a corporation, may be the president, a vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation or the corporation's general manager at the particular business location. Otherwise, no other individual may qualify as an applicant on behalf of a business. Corporate applicants must either be incorporated in the state or must have registered to do business in the state through the secretary of state's office. 
(2)  If a partnership, each co-owner of the partnership. 
(3)  If an individual proprietor, that individual. 
(4)  If a firm or association, the person with the greatest proprietary interest. 
Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
Bona fide private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of the city. 
Business day means a day on which City Hall is open for business. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
County line means the boundary between Gwinnett County and Walton County. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal linear feet from the front door of the proposed licensee's premises in a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route to the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the ground, whichever is applicable. For the purposes of this chapter, distances shall be measured along the pedestrian route of travel to and from the premises. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and fortified wines. 
Family means any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with other ingredients added, including but not limited to, brandy. 
Hotel means any building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where a minimum of 50 sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and food is actually served and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen and minimum seating capacity of 60, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. 
Individual means a natural person. 
Interest in license means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a license; a partner of a partnership which owns or co-owns a license; a stockholder in any corporation which owns or co-owns a license; an owner, co-owner, lessor, sublessor, partner in a partnership or stockholder in a corporation owning or leasing any real estate on which is located a retail consumption dealer, a retail dealer or wholesale dealer; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest. 
License means authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensee means a person holding a license. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer, but not including sake. 
Motel means any building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where a minimum of 50 sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, and food is actually served and consumed in one or more dining rooms, having an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a minimum seating capacity of 60, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted on the same premises. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" shall also include any privately owned or leased courtyard or patio that is architecturally visibly defined. 
Principal business, when used in this chapter, means that at least 75 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform service, repair or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this chapter the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by this chapter. 
Private residence means a house, dwelling, condominium or duplex wherein not less than one, nor more than two families customarily reside, but does not include a mobile home; an apartment house having facilities for the housing of more than two families; a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders; any residence located in a commercially or industrially zoned district; or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application by a proposed licensee. 
Restaurant means a public place selling and preparing food for consumption by the public. Such establishment must own, hire or lease a building or space in a building for such a purpose. The establishment must also have a suitable kitchen as defined by the appropriate county health and state health regulations and dining room space and sufficient equipment therefor. It must have a full-service kitchen with a three-compartment pot sink, stove or grill permanently installed, appropriate refrigeration equipment, and with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its guests every hour which the establishment is open. The establishment must seat at least 50 people or more and derive at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales from the preparation of meals or food. The establishment must also have a minimum of 1,500 square feet of space, and the establishment must meet all of the minimum building and zoning requirements as provided in applicable ordinances now in force in the city or such ordinances as amended, supplemented or newly acted by the city council. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to consumers for consumption on the premises only and not for resale or to go. 
Retail dealer or retail package dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to consumers only to go, not for resale and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means state, county, city or church schools and such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
Seating capacity means the amount of individual seating which is located at tables for the purpose of serving the dining public, but not including any seating located in a bar or other area designated primarily for the serving of alcoholic beverages. 
Wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to retail dealers or other wholesale dealers for resale. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, including, but not limited to, sparkling wine, champagne, combinations of such beverages, vermouth, special natural wine, rectified wine and like products, but not including cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-3. - Intent. 
The businesses of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling and otherwise dealing in or processing alcoholic beverages are privileges and not rights pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1, and such privileges shall not be exercised within the city limits without full compliance with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 4-4. - Authority of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager or his/her designee shall review all applications for an alcoholic beverage license for compliance with this chapter. All applicants shall furnish upon request all data, information and records necessary for a complete investigation. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee shall also have authority to prescribe such forms as it deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 4-5. - Grandfathering. 
(a)  So as to prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the licenses and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the additional or new requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance hereunder to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance hereunder with regard to the city ordinance requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. 
(c)  Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 4-6. - No sales to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or employed in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, to permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or to allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or serve any person under 21 years of age with any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license, valid state identification card, or valid military identification card may be reasonably accepted by the person hereunder as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)  Any attempt to commit an act made unlawful by this section shall itself be unlawful. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is under 21 years of age to have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the city, any alcoholic beverage, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 years shall be handled as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 4-7. - Minors prohibited from premises. 
(a)  Licensees under this chapter shall not allow minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless accompanied by an adult. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to restaurants, bona fide private clubs, or others whose predominant business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, grocery or convenience stores. Nor shall this section apply to minors who are employees of the business. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 1) 
State Law reference— Underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et seq. 
Secs. 4-8—4-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS AND MANUFACTURERS 
DIVISION 1. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 4-33. - Purpose; tax in addition to other fees and taxes. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to establish a system of excise taxes in conformity with state law in order to maximize the revenue permitted to the city under state law. 
(b)  Taxes nonexclusive. The excise taxes provided within this section shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or other charge which now or in the future may be imposed upon a licensee selling malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits at retail or wholesale within the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 4-34. - Excise tax levied on wholesale dealers. 
(a)  Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon wholesale dealers, there is imposed and levied upon all licensed wholesale dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits to retailers within the city an excise tax for the privilege of doing such business in the city, to be computed and collected as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Basis for computation of tax on malt beverages. 
(1)  Malt beverages—Bulk containers. All malt beverages including those commonly known as tap or draught beer when sold in or from a barrel or from a bulk container shall be subject to a tax imposed on the wholesale dealer selling such malt beverage within the municipal limits of the city. The tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15.5 gallons and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts less than 15.5 gallons shall be imposed. 
(2)  Malt beverages—Not in bulk containers. All malt beverages sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except those included in subsection (b)(1) of this section, shall be subject to an excise tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces, which tax shall be levied and imposed on each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city. 
(c)  Basis for computation of tax on wine. The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter for wine sold by wholesalers to retailers within the city. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(d)  Basis for computation of tax on package sales of distilled spirits. The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter for distilled spirits sold by the package, excluding fortified wine, sold by wholesalers to retailers within the city. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(e)  Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. 
(1)  Record keeping. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city, whether delivered to the retail dealer's place of business in the city or elsewhere for resale in the city, shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city, keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of alcoholic beverages to each retail dealer in the city. Such records are to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Report requirements. On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of wine, malt beverages and/or distilled spirits to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax due under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes due, as shown on said report. 
(3)  Penalty for late payment. The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the wholesaler licensed to do business in the city. In the event the tax due hereunder is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting wholesale licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month. 
(4)  False reporting. Filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under a truthful and accurate report, and/or a penalty of $100.00 whichever penalty is greater. 
(5)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer. If any wholesale dealer fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five days from the date of such notice, the license of such wholesale dealer may be revoked as provided in this article. 
(6)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or who shall assist any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, on conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be fined or sentenced as provided by this Code, and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(7)  Performance bond required. To ensure payment of the excise tax levied hereby and prior to the issuance of any wholesale alcoholic beverage license in the city, an applicant must post and file with the city manager, along with the license application, a performance bond conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the applicant of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter, and upon the payment of any taxes due to the city. Upon the violation of this chapter, or any part thereof, such bond will be forfeited as determined by the public safety committee of the city council at a hearing held for that purpose upon three days' written notice given to the licensee concerned. Bond shall be payable to the city and shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be in a form acceptable to the city manager. This bond is required in addition to any other bond required in this article. 
(8)  Stamps. No decal, stamp or other identifying mark shall be required on malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits sold within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 2) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 4-35. - Excise tax levied upon sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  Every purchaser of distilled spirits by the drink within the city limits shall be liable for a tax thereon at the rate of three percent of the retail price or charge for such drink. Such taxes shall be collected by retail consumption licensees hereunder, and such licensees shall remit the tax to the city manager on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for the preceding month. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales, and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city manager in the same manner and to the same extent as required of cash sales. 
(b)  Licensees collecting the tax provided for in this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction should be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-133. 
(c)  Excise taxes levied under this section and received by the city after the 20th day of the month shall be charged a ten percent penalty. 
(d)  In the event the city manager deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city pursuant to this section, for any month, he or she shall notify the licensee of such need for verification, and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the city manager, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have 30 business days to submit such a report to the city manager following such a request. 
(e)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section constitutes a violation of this chapter and may result in revocation or suspension of a retail consumption or other alcoholic beverage license. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 2) 
State Law reference— Excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-130. 
Secs. 4-36—4-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-55. - Required; classifications; fees. 
(a)  No malt beverage, wines, spirituous liquors or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored for sale, delivered, sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this article and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)  The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code, and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this article then this article shall control. 
(c)  Licenses which may be issued under this article are as follows: 
(1)  Retail consumption dealer, including restaurants, bona fide private clubs, etc.: 
a.  For distilled spirits, malt beverage and wine. 
b.  For malt beverage only. 
c.  For wine only. 
d.  For malt beverage and wine only. 
(2)  Retail package dealer and/or wholesale dealer: 
a.  For malt beverage only. 
b.  For wine only. 
c.  For malt beverage and wine only. 
d.  For distilled spirits, malt beverage and wine. 
(3)  No retail package dealer or wholesale licensee shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location, with the exception of an ancillary wine tasting permit addressed in section 4-71. 
(d)  Upon the filing of an application for a new or renewal license pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee for such application as established and set forth by the city. The application fee shall cover the costs of advertisement, investigation, and processing of the application, and any other administrative costs related to functions performed by the city in regard to such applications. In addition, the applicant shall pay an annual license fee for each new or renewed license it obtains from the city pursuant to this chapter. Such license fees shall be established by the city from time to time in accordance with the classification of alcoholic beverage licenses as set forth in this section. Such annual license fee shall not be pro-rated and shall not be refundable except as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  If the wholesale dealer's principal place of business is located within the city, the city will levy a license fee in accordance with the classification into which the applicant falls. In addition to the general occupation tax, the wholesale dealer shall also pay a processing fee in the amount established by the city to cover the expenses of investigation and processing. The applications of wholesale dealers located within the city must be approved by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(f)  The annual license fee for a bona fide club, due to its nonprofit status, may be reduced as set forth in the fee schedule established by the city. A bona fide club shall pay the scheduled application or renewal fee at the time it makes application for a consumption license. 
(g)  No city alcohol license shall be effective until the licensee also obtains a state alcohol license. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-56. - Application—Filing; form; contents; information. 
(a)  Application/applicant. All individuals desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application to the city at the City Hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such applications shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, as that term is defined in section 4-1 above. The applicant applying on behalf of a business shall be the owner of the proposed business, if the business is solely owned. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners shall be included; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and the managing member, and the names and addresses of any shareholder or member holding at least 20 percent interest in the business; 
(2)  The name and address of the general manager of the particular business location; 
(3)  The nature and character of the proposed business to be carried on by the applicant and the address where the proposed business is to be located; 
(4)  Any such other information as may be required by mayor and city council, the city manager, or the police department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(5)  Corporation. Corporate applicants must either be incorporated in the state or must be registered to do business in the state through the secretary of state's office. 
(6)  Hotel or motel. The hotel or motel must qualify as a restaurant as defined in section 4-1 in order to apply for a license under this chapter. 
(b)  Information required within 20 business days of request. All applications for a license under this chapter shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the city, through any authorized officer such as the city manager, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 20 business days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the city through its duly authorized representative, such as the city manager, chief of police, or mayor and city council, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance or denial of such license. The failure to produce such persons within 20 business days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic denial, with prejudice, of such application. 
(c)  Information required. All applications for a new license under this article must be, and applications for a renewal license may be required to be, accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information in addition to that information referenced above and including but not limited to: 
(1)  The names and addresses of each person having at least a 20 percent financial interest in this business by way of ownership of building, stock, receipt of income or otherwise. Whether any such person, or any member of such person's family has any interest in any other business which sells alcoholic beverages, either by the drink or by the package, and if so, the name, address, type of business of such business; 
(2)  The name and address for the past ten years of each individual licensee, including the registered agent where necessary; 
(3)  Each applicant shall provide his or her birth date; Social Security number; home and business addresses; home, business and cell phone numbers; and other information as may be requested by the city in the application. This information also shall be required for the registered agent, if necessary, and the general manager of the particular location for which a license is sought. Each applicant, corporate officer (if applicable), registered agent (if applicable), and general manager shall sign a consent form which shall authorize the city to obtain and review a criminal history background check on such individual; 
(4)  The ownership of the land and building where the proposed retail business is to be operated; 
(5)  The amount of rental to be paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; 
(6)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the business is located; and 
(7)  Any other information called for as part of the application by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Application must be complete. Each application furnished under this section must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(e)  Receipt of Code. As a prerequisite to the issuance of any new license under this chapter and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a renewed license under this chapter, all applicants and existing licensees shall be required to execute and deliver to the city a verified statement indicating receipt of this Code relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  Employee training. All applicants and existing licensees shall ensure that employees are properly trained to prevent intoxication, drunk driving, underage drinking, and other alcohol-related problems. 
(g)  (1)  Fingerprints required. A new applicant for a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be required to submit his or her fingerprints to the Walton County Probate Court to be used for criminal investigation. For renewal applicants, fingerprints are not required but the application shall include a background check of the applicant, to be processed by the Walton County Probate Court. The Walton County Probate Court requires payments of processing fees for fingerprints and background checks. 
(2)  Criminal history. No applicant shall have been convicted, nor have entered a plea of nolo contendere within the ten years immediately preceding the date of application for any felony or have violated any federal, state, city or county law or regulation regarding alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs, their sale, consumption, distribution or manufacture. This prohibition shall also apply to the general manager who shall have managerial and supervisory authority over the particular location for which a license is sought. In those instances involving partnerships, this prohibition shall apply to all partners. In those instances involving corporations, this prohibition shall also apply to the corporation's officers and registered agent. 
(h)  Photograph required. All applicants and existing licensees shall submit a color photograph which is two-inch by two-inch in size taken within the past year. 
(i)  Residency required. Each applicant for a license under this article shall have been and continue to be a bona fide resident of the state for the period of three years immediately preceding the date of application and shall remain a bona fide resident of the state during all times that the license and any renewal thereof is in effect. All applicants and all registered agents shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(j)  No applicant shall be indebted to the city for any fees, costs, or penalties. Each applicant's accounts with the city for fees, taxes, utilities, or other charges imposed under the Code of Ordinances shall be current at the time of application and remain in good standing. 
(k)  Registered agent required. 
(1)  All applications for licenses under this article shall nominate and name in the application one or more residents of the state as the registered agent and representative of the applicant to receive all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents on behalf of the applicant in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The applicant shall give the mailing address of such registered agent, and the mailing to any registered agent at that address of any notice required to be given under this article or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the applicant/licensee. 
(2)  Such registered agent shall be a representative of the licensee and must be approved by the city manager or his designee. The city manager shall refuse to approve any registered agent who is not a bona fide resident of the state or who has been convicted, within the ten years preceding his nomination, of any felony of any kind or any misdemeanor relating to an alcoholic beverage business or any state law or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(3)  If any registered agent shall cease to be a representative of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident of the state or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the licensee shall notify the city manager in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered agent within five business days after such event occurs. Such new registered agent shall meet the requirements of this section and must be approved by the city manager or his designee. The city shall charge a fee for a change of the licensee's registered agent; provided, however, that if the licensee fails to notify the city and nominate a new registered agent within said five-day period, then the city shall charge a higher fee for a change of the licensee's registered agent and/or revoke the licensee's license. The fees for a change of the licensee's registered agent shall be set by the mayor and city council. 
(l)  Premises and survey requirements. The application shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the business operation, its location, and facilities; 
(2)  A blueprint or scale drawing of the business facilities, except as provided in subsection 4-58(a); 
(3)  A survey performed and signed by a certified surveyor and dated no more than 30 days prior to the filing of the application which indicates the location of the business and the distance to the nearest residence, school, church, library and alcoholic treatment center. 
(m)  In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the city shall consider, in addition to the grounds set forth above, the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The manner in which the license representative or any individual listed on the application or partner has conducted any business within the city as to the necessity for unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance or as to the necessity for city action to compel the applicant's and/or licensee's adherence to any city law, regulation or ordinance; 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, public safety, the general character of the neighborhood and the effect of such an operation on surrounding property values; and 
(3)  Whether the license representative or any individual listed on the application or partner has ever had an alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by the state or any political subdivision thereof, including the city. 
(n)  Additional information required for retail consumption license. Any applicant for a retail consumption license as a restaurant under this article shall provide, in addition to all other required information, a signed return on a form provided by the city manager setting forth the amount of gross receipts and the allocation of such receipts to the serving of meals for the entire preceding calendar year, to be used as an estimate as the gross receipts and the allocation of those receipts to the serving of meals for the current year. Where an applicant seeking a retail consumption license as a restaurant operated as a restaurant for only part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part, including the allocation of such receipts to the serving of meals, shall be set forth in such return. Such return shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts and the allocation of those gross receipts to the serving of food for the business for the current calendar year. 
(o)  Oath. The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, the laws of the state pertaining to alcoholic beverages and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant. 
(p)  Misleading, omitting or obsolete information. 
(1)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be cause sufficient for the denial thereof. 
(2)  Any information that changes or otherwise becomes obsolete shall be reported immediately. 
(3)  When any license that is issued on the basis of an application containing misleading or untrue information or omitted or unreported changed material information, such circumstances shall be cause for revocation of same. 
(q)  Fee. Each application for an initial license or a renewal of an existing license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by the city in the schedule approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-57. - Notice of application. 
The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed premises to be licensed, signs of a size, number and form prescribed by the city manager or his designee, stating the names of owners and address of the applicant, type of license applied for and the business name and location applied for. Said signs shall be posted at the location within five days of submission of the application and must remain in place until a final determination has been made on the license. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-58. - Additional application requirements for retail dealers in distilled spirits by the package. 
(a)  Licensed premises' building requirements: 
(1)  No license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall be effective until the building in which the business will be located is complete, detailed plans of the building and outside premises have been submitted to and approved by the city, and the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for the building. For initial qualification for a license, however, the applicant need not comply with subsection 4-56(l)(2) if the building is not complete at the time application is made. In lieu of blueprints, the applicant must attach to his or her initial application a survey as required in subsection 4-56(l)(3), a rendering of the proposed building, and a site plan. The proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the building inspector, the fire marshal, the planning director, and shall comply with other ordinances of the city for zoning, storage, parking, buffers and other issues. The proposed building also shall comply with all regulations of the state revenue commissioner and all the laws of the state. 
(2)  Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building shall be readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located. The lighting shall reveal the inside retail area of the building and shall reveal all of the outside premises of the building. 
(3)  The licensed premises must be within a freestanding building completely and physically separate from any other business activities. The building must contain a minimum of 10,000 square feet of heated and air conditioned space. 
(4)  The building in which the licensed premises is located shall be finished with brick and glass except for incidental metal trim. 
(5)  The licensed premises shall allow ingress and egress for customers and their purchases through a door opening to the outside and facing a public street or public pedestrian area. 
(6)  The building shall be owned or leased by the applicant for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package, and proof of ownership or lease is required. 
(7)  The licensee is required to install security cameras and otherwise to comply with section 4-134 of this chapter. 
(b)  Performance bond required: Before any license to sell distilled spirits by the package is granted, the applicant must post with the city, along with his or her application, a performance bond on the construction with an insurance company as surety. This bond shall require the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part of this article, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the city. The bond is to be approved by the city and shall be properly executed. The bond is to be in the amount of $100.00 for a wholesale license and $2,500.00 for a retail license. A cash bond is acceptable. The money will be held in escrow. The applicant must fill out a bond letter, available at the department of planning and development. 
(c)  Proof of insurance required: The applicant for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall provide proof of comprehensive general liability insurance, including liquor liability coverage, for the licensed premises with coverage of at least $2,000,000.00 per occurrence, inclusive of personal injury, bodily injury, death, and property damage, and an umbrella policy with coverage of at least $2,000,000.00 per occurrence. At the time a license application is submitted, the city will accept as proof of insurance a quote from a reputable insurance company. The applicant may need to ask the insurance company for an extension of the quote. Prior to opening a package store, and thereafter at the time of renewing a license, a licensee must submit a certificate of insurance to the city planning department. Failure to do so is cause for revocation of a license. 
(d)  Proof of inventory required: The applicant for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall provide proof that it will maintain a wholesale inventory valued at $600,000.00. An affidavit of the applicant satisfies this requirement. 
(e)  Letter of credit: The applicant for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall furnish the city a letter of credit in the amount of at least $2,000,000.00 per application. 
(f)  Number of licenses to be determined by population: The city shall issue no more than two licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine by the package until such time as the number of city residents reaches 30,000, as the population has been determined by a certified census count of the United States Census Bureau, at which time the city may issue an additional license or licenses so long as thereafter the number of licenses in operation within the city limits at any one time shall not exceed one license to sell packaged distilled spirits for each 10,000 city residents as determined by a certified census of the United States Census Bureau. 
(g)  No Sunday sales: No retailer of distilled spirits by the package shall permit his place of business to be open for the sale of such beverages on Sundays or on days or times prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4; Ord. of 2-18-2014(1), § 1; Ord. of 9-10-2015, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 4-59. - Grant or denial of license. 
(a)  Grant or denial of license for retail package dealer for malt beverage and/or wine only, or for retail consumption dealer, or for wholesale dealer. 
(1)  All applications shall be submitted during business hours to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall mark the application with the time and date received. Upon the filing of an application for a retail package or wholesale dealer for malt beverages and/or wine, or upon the filing of a retail consumption license, the city manager shall have five business days to review the application and to send a copy of the application to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws. Each department notified shall submit a report within 20 business days of receipt of the application to the city manager which states whether there are any objections to the application. 
(2)  Within 20 business days from the date the city manager receives all department notifications, the city manager shall render a written determination as to whether the application complies with the requirements of this chapter and shall include a decision either to grant or to deny the license sought. 
(3)  The written decision shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant whose application was considered. If the decision of the city manager is to deny the requested license, then the letter to the applicant shall set forth in reasonable detail the grounds upon which the license is being denied. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee may deny a city license or renewal thereof under this article on any of the following grounds: 
a.  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
b.  Failure to pay all required fees and taxes; 
c.  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this article; 
d.  False information in the application or attached documents; 
e.  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agents; 
f.  Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this article; 
g.  Failure to meet distance, location or number of business requirements; 
h.  Prior convictions as herein provided; or 
i.  Failure to meet any other requirements in this article for a license or any other requirement in any other provision of this Code or the Charter. 
(5)  The letter shall further advise the applicant of the right to appeal the decision to the mayor and city council within 20 business days of the date on which the applicant receives by certified mail the written decision of the city manager. 
(b)  Grant or denial of license for retail package dealer for distilled spirits. 
(1)  The city shall publish notice of availability of any license(s) to sell distilled spirits by the package in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and state the deadline for filing an application. Such notice shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks. The application deadline shall be at least 20 business days after publication. All applications for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall be submitted during business hours to the city manager or his/her designee, who shall mark the application with the time and date received. 
(2)  Upon the filing of an application, the city manager shall have five business days to review the application and to send a copy of the application to all affected departments of city government to determine compliance with city regulations and laws. Each department notified shall submit a report within 20 business days of receipt of the application to the city manager which states whether there are any objections to the application. 
(3)  Within 20 business days from the date the city manager receives all department notifications, the city manager shall render a written determination as to whether the application complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  The written determination shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant whose application was considered. 
(5)  If the decision of the city manager is to deny the requested license, then the letter to the applicant shall set forth in reasonable detail the grounds upon which the license is being denied. The letter shall further advise the applicant of the right to appeal the decision to the mayor and city council within 20 business days of the date on which the written decision of the city manager is sent by certified mail. 
(6)  The city manager or his designee may deny a city license or renewal thereof under this article on any of the following grounds: 
a.  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
b.  Failure to pay all required fees and taxes; 
c.  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this article; 
d.  False information in the application or attached documents; 
e.  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agents; 
f.  Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this article; 
g.  Failure to meet distance, location or number of business requirements; 
h.  Prior convictions as herein provided; or 
i.  Failure to meet any other requirements in this article for a license or any other requirement in any other provision of this Code or the Charter. 
(7)  If the city manager determines that the applicant meets the criteria for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package within the Loganville city limits, but there are more qualified applicants than available licenses, then the city manager shall send a letter by certified mail to the applicant notifying him or her that a licensee or licensees to sell distilled spirits by the package shall be selected by lot at a meeting of the city council and of the date, time and place of said meeting. 
(8)  The letter shall further advise the applicant of the right to appeal the decision to the mayor and city council within 20 business days of the date on which the lottery takes place. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-60. - Appeal to mayor and city council. 
(a)  Any applicant who wishes to appeal the decision of the city manager or the results of the lottery shall file a written appeal of the decision with the city manager within 20 business days as referenced in section 4-59 above. The city manager will schedule a hearing before the mayor and city council at which the applicant will be given the opportunity to present additional information and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. This hearing, which shall be transcribed by a court reporter, shall take place within 30 business days of the date of the applicant's written appeal to the city manager. 
(b)  The standards to be applied by the mayor and city council, acting in its judicial capacity to grant or deny a license, shall include whether, in the best judgment of the mayor and city council, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing standards, should any license representative of the applicant fail to attend a meeting at which it is considered before the mayor and city council regarding a new license, a request to change a licensee or a license representative, or a request to relocate the business of a licensee, the mayor and city council may consider such application or request to have been withdrawn by the applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(d)  Within 30 business days of the date of the appeal hearing, the mayor and city council shall make a written determination as to whether the license should be granted or denied. In the event that the mayor and city council's decision is to deny the license, the grounds for such denial shall be included in the written determination. 
(e)  The city manager, or his designee, shall send the written determination of the mayor and city council by certified mail to the applicant or licensee at the address shown on the application within three business days of the date of the action taken by the mayor and city council. 
(f)  Appeal. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final unless the decision is appealed by certiorari to the superior court of the county within which lies the premises for which adverse action is being taken, which will be either Walton or Gwinnett County. Such appeal must be filed within 30 business days of the date the applicant receives the written determination by certified mail. 
(g)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this section, the applicant may not re-apply for a license for at least 24 months from the final date of such denial. This prohibition shall not apply to the denial of an application based on a failure to meet distance requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-61. - Temporary licenses. 
(a)  Persons making alcoholic beverage license applications pursuant to this chapter 4 because of a change in ownership of the retail licensed establishment, after properly filing all required documents, may be authorized by the city manager to operate pursuant to a temporary license. Before any such temporary license may be issued, the applicant must have filed with the city the following documents and materials under the conditions indicated: 
(1)  All documents required by city and pursuant to the Code for obtaining a license appropriate to the type business for which application is made, including payment by certified check, money order or cashier's check of the license fee at the time of submission of the license application. 
(2)  A written request, on forms to be provided by the city, by the applicant for a temporary license to the city manager. 
(3)  The applicant, licensee and agent for the temporary license must be identical to the applicant, licensee and agent indicated on the related annual alcoholic beverage license application. 
(4)  A written, notarized statement, on forms to be provided by the city, indicating that the applicant, temporary licensee and agent waive any and all rights available to them to appeal the decision by the city manager to deny their application for a temporary license or to revoke a temporary license that has been issued to them, and that the applicant, temporary licensee and agent agree to all conditions set forth in this section. As used in this section, "rights to appeal" shall include, but not be limited to, injunctive relief, writ of certiorari, writ of mandamus, writ of prohibition, or any court action which relates in any way to said decision(s). 
(5)  When preliminary records checks have been completed, determined and judgments made, and the city manager is satisfied that the location for the proposed license substantially complies with the provisions of the Code authorizing such license in the city, a temporary license may be issued if deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
(6)  The duration of any temporary license issued shall not exceed 120 days. 
(7)  A temporary license shall not be issued to any entity, real or artificial, who owes the city any monies at the time a temporary license is sought. 
(8)  There shall be assessed and paid by cashier's check, money order or certified check a nonrefundable temporary license fee which shall be established by the mayor and city council. This fee shall be in addition to all other fees required by the Code. 
(9)  The issuance and duration of any temporary license pursuant to the conditions stated in this section is within the sole discretion of the city manager and such temporary license may be revoked by the city manager at any time without notice, cause, hearing or refund of any portion of the temporary license fee. 
(10)  The issuance of the temporary license pursuant to the above conditions does not eliminate or alter in any way the requirement that the applicant must otherwise follow the application process provided in the remaining provisions of this Code. 
(b)  There shall be no vested right to, or protectable property interest in, the issuance of a temporary license as provided for in this section, or to the issuance of any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  During any one calendar year, there shall be not more than one temporary license granted for any single retail licensed establishment, as such temporary licenses are provided for in this section. 
(d)  The city manager shall notify the mayor and city council within three days after receiving an application for a temporary license. Such notification shall also include the name of the applicant and the address of the proposed retailed license establishment to receive the temporary license. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-62. - Eligibility for retail consumption. 
No retail consumption license shall be issued to any applicant whose establishment does not meet the requirements of a restaurant or bona fide private club, with the exception of an ancillary wine tasting permit as addressed in section 4-71 and a special event permit as addressed in section 4-71.1. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4; Ord. of 6-12-2014(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-63. - Time limits on opening and continuing business. 
(a)  All persons and/or businesses issued licenses under this article must open for business within 90 days after the issuance of the city license, except that new construction of a retail package store for distilled spirits shall be complete, and the licensed premises must open for business, within 12 months after completion of the appeal process pertaining to applications for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package in the same county as licensee. The appeal process shall be deemed complete upon expiration of the time to file an appeal or upon issuance of a court order where appeal rights have been exhausted. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this subsection may make written request to the city manager for an extension of time and the city manager at his discretion may grant or deny the request. Failure to open for business within the time set forth herein shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued license and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. 
(b)  This section shall apply retroactively to licenses to sell distilled spirits by the package that have been issued as of the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(c)  Any license issued under this article shall automatically be null and void where the licensed person and/or business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months, except as allowed for construction in subsection (a). Any licensee unable to comply with the time limit of this subsection may make written request to the city manager for an extension of time and city manager at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4; Ord. of 10-10-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 4-64. - Restrictions. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this article unless otherwise allowed by state law. 
(b)  No person shall have an interest in more than two retail consumption licenses. 
(c)  No elected or full-time appointed official of the city or any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to such an official of the city shall own any interest in any license issued under this article unless one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office; 
(2)  The interest is declared in writing at the time the application for said license is made and said elected or full-time appointed official shall not participate in official action or consideration of license; or 
(3)  The interest obtained in an ongoing business holding a license is declared in writing at the time of the acquisition and filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-65. - Business location; required distances. 
(a)  Unless the following uses of property are pre-existing, nonconforming uses under the city's zoning regulations, licenses shall not be issued to authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages at any location which does not meet or exceed the following minimum distance separation requirements from the following establishments: 
(1)  For retail consumption dealers, the licensee's premises cannot be located: 
a.  In or within 50 yards of any church grounds; 
b.  In or within 50 yards of any structure used as a residences at the time of application; 
c.  In or within 100 yards of the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds, or college campus is located; or 
d.  In or within 100 yards of any public library which is on the same side of the street as the proposed location. 
(2)  For a retail dealer in malt beverages and/or wine by the package, the licensee's premises cannot be located: 
a.  In or within 200 yards of any church grounds; or 
b.  In or within 200 yards of the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds, or college campus is located. 
c.  In or within 200 yards of any retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package. 
(3)  For a retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package, the licensee's premises cannot be located: 
a.  In or within 200 yards of any church grounds; or 
b.  In or within 200 yards of the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds, or college campus is located. 
c.  In or within 500 yards of any other retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package. 
d.  In or within 200 yards of any retail dealer in malt beverages and/or wine by the package. 
(4)  For a wholesale dealer in distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine, the licensee's premises cannot be located: 
a.  In or within 200 yards of any church grounds; or 
b.  In or within 200 yards of the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds, or college campus is located. 
(5)  For a bona fide private club, the licensee's premises cannot be located: 
a.  In or within 100 yards of any church grounds; 
b.  In or within 100 yards of any structure used as a residences at the time of application; 
c.  In or within 200 yards of the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds, or college campus is located; or 
d.  In or within 100 yards of any public library which is on the same side of the street as the proposed location. 
(b)  No person shall sell alcohol, distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages in or within 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or county or municipal government therein. 
(c)  No person shall sell alcohol, distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises in or within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(d)  With the exception of measuring distances to schools which shall be measured from the property line of the tract of land on which a school building, school grounds or college campus is located to the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable, all other distances shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure or partial building unit from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; thence 
(2)  In a straight line, regardless of obstructions, to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; thence 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; thence 
(4)  To the front door of the building, or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the term "nonaccessory structure" means any structure located on the school ground, college campus, residential lot, library or alcoholic treatment center which would not be considered an accessory use under the appropriate interpretations of the city zoning regulations. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no church that becomes located near or expands into the vicinity of a licensee under this article shall be entitled to object to the location of a licensee and no license shall be denied because it is within the prohibited footage as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. In addition, no license shall be denied because the location is within the prohibited footage of a temporary church. 
(g)  Grandfather provision: No license which is in effect on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted shall be revoked before its date of expiration by reason of the new distance regulations set out in this subsection if the license was granted in reliance on another distance regulation previously in effect at the time the license was issued. No application for a license or for a renewal license shall be denied by reason of new distance regulations set out in this subsection if the application is for a premises for which a license was granted prior to the date the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective, in reliance on another distance regulations previously in effect at the time the application for the license was filed. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4; Ord. of 9-10-2015, § 4) 
State Law reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-66. - Zoning district. 
No license shall be issued under this article unless the applicant's place of business is located in an area of the city that is zoned commercial as designated by the city's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-67. - Calendar-year term. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall remain in effect for the calendar year of issuance (i.e., for all licenses granted between January 1 and December 31 of a given calendar year, the license shall remain in effect until the close of business on December 31 of that same calendar year). No license shall extend from one calendar year into the next. 
(b)  All renewal applications, containing all information required by this article and applicable fees are due on or before November 15 of the year in which the license expires, and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any city license. Renewal applications made after November 15 shall be subject to a 20 percent penalty on the applicable license fee and one percent interest per month delinquent. 
(c)  No license under this article may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-68. - Transfer of location. 
(a)  Any business and/or person licensed under this article that moves from one location in the city to another location in the city shall make application for a new license as if for an original license on or before the day of moving in the manner set forth in this chapter of the City of Loganville Code of Ordinances. The license can be valid at the new location only if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the city and all other requirements of this Code. 
(b)  The new license application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable administrative fee. This administrative fee shall be separate and in addition to the occupation tax and/or business license tax. 
(c)  This administrative fee shall be set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-69. - Transfer of ownership. 
(a)  The transfer of ownership of a business requiring an alcohol license shall be considered in the same manner as the termination of the business and the establishment and application of a new business. In the event that the owner of a business requiring an alcohol license desires to transfer the same, or in the event that any interest in the business for which the license was issued is sold or otherwise transferred, then the purchaser or transferee of such license or interest shall apply to the city as if for an original license on or before the date on which such sale or transfer is made. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a corporation, a new alcohol license shall not be required as herein provided unless a change in stock ownership in the corporation results in ownership of more than 50 percent of the outstanding corporate stock, voting or otherwise, by persons or combinations of persons not owners of such stock at the time the license was issued. The term "any interest" is defined as being an ownership of stock or control of 50 percent or more of the partnership or corporation. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, one or more partners in a partnership holding a license may withdraw in favor of one or more of the existing partners. 
(b)  The transfer of ownership of a business shall not affect the distance requirements previously approved by the city. 
(c)  In case of the death of any natural person holding a city alcohol license, or any interest therein, the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor of the lawful heir or devisee of the deceased person by filing a new application with the city for the change in license ownership within 75 days of such death. The business involved may continue to operate until disposition of the application. No additional fees or business taxes shall be charged above what would be due if the business, or portion thereof, remained under the deceased person's ownership. 
(d)  Distilled spirits package stores. For retail package dealer licenses to sell distilled spirits, the city shall process the application in accordance with subsection 4-59(a) in the case of transfer of ownership. If a license becomes available by means other than transfer or death, then the city shall process the application in accordance with subsection 4-59(b). 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-70. - Completion of premises proposed to be licensed. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this article is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article and this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-71. - Wine tastings. 
(a)  Eligibility. The holder of a current, valid retail package dealer license for wine only or of a current, valid retail package dealer license for malt beverage and wine only shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting permit to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. To obtain a wine tasting permit from the city, an applicant also must hold a current, valid wine license in the state. 
(b)  Permit application. An applicant for a wine tasting permit shall file with the city manager or his designee an application and a permit fee in an amount to be established by the city. The form necessary for such application shall be furnished by the city. 
(c)  Conditions. A wine tasting permit shall allow the holder to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  Wine tasting shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in connection with instructional classes designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(2)  Wine tasting is permitted only within the enclosed portion of the premises. 
(3)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee of the licensee, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(4)  Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. No individual under 21 years of age shall be permitted to consume any sample. 
(5)  No open or unsealed containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(6)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(7)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of a malt beverage and wine store operating in connection with a retail package dealer licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(8)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a wholesale wine outlet. 
(9)  The applicant shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from at least 50 manufacturers of wine. 
(10)  The applicant's establishment shall have minimum interior floor area of 500 square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. 
(11)  Wine tasting for customers shall be conducted only at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(12)  The holder of a wine tasting permit may conduct educational classes with tasting not more than two times per week for a period not to exceed three consecutive hours. All conditions set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor area where the classes can be conducted. 
(13)  The holder of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge a fee to participate in wine tasting classes nor for individual samples of wine. 
(14)  All permit holders must comply with this Code section, other city ordinances, and all state statutes and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to, those dealing with hours of operation, zoning, and distance requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 4-71.1. - Special events. 
(a)  A retail consumption license holder under this article may apply for a special event alcohol permit to sell malt beverages and/or wine: (1) for consumption on the premises in approved temporary outdoor areas contiguous and connected to the retail location for which the license was originally issued; and/or (2) for consumption on the premises of the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center. An applicant for a special event alcohol permit must submit an application to the city manager. The following requirements must be satisfied before a license will be issued pursuant to this section: 
(1)  The only entrance and exit to the event must be through a controlled entry point which allows for easy monitoring of patrons entering and leaving the event. 
(2)  The outside event must be enclosed by a temporary fence or an enclosed tent. The fence shall be a minimum of 3½ feet in height. 
(3)  The temporary fence or tent must have two emergency exits with an alarm that sounds so that the licensee will be alerted of unauthorized use of an emergency exit when no emergency exists. A uniformed off-duty police officer or security guard may be stationed at each emergency exit instead of a gate and alarm. The Historic Rock Gym Convention Center must have a uniformed off-duty police officer or security guard stationed at each emergency exit. 
(4)  The temporary fence or tent must be installed and inspected at least one day prior to the event. Should the event fall on a Sunday, the installation of the fence must be completed no later than noon (12:00 p.m.) on the Friday prior to the event. Alcohol sales will not be approved for the event without inspection and approval of the temporary fence or tent by the city. 
(5)  For events not held in the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center, a site plan must be submitted to the city manager's office for approval. If the site plan provides for an area to accommodate more than 25 persons, and for all events held in the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center, a crowd control and security plan must be submitted to the city for approval. The department of planning and development must approve any temporary structures, such as tents, within the fenced area. 
(6)  A signed and notarized letter from the property owner must be submitted to the city manager's office authorizing the use of the property for the event. Events at the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center shall be permitted as required by the city's special events policy. 
(7)  All points/locations of sale of beer or wine must be licensed and the required fees, if any, paid. The event shall not exceed two days. 
(8)  A nonrefundable administrative fee as established by the City of Loganville must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(9)  Completed applications must be submitted to the city manager's office at least 60 days prior to the scheduled event. 
(10)  The distance requirements outlined in subsection 4-65(a) shall not apply to permits issued in accordance with this subsection. 
(b)  Applications for a permit under this section shall be handled in accordance with sections 4-59—4-61 of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2014(1), § 2) 
Sec. 4-71.2. - Malt beverage/wine for consumption on the premises at special events. 
(a)  Special events: Rock Gym. 
(1)  A retail consumption license holder under this article may apply for a special event alcohol permit to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises of the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center. 
(2)  The following requirements must be satisfied before a license will be issued pursuant to this section for consumption on the premises at the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center: 
a.  Events at the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center shall be permitted as required by the city's special events policy. 
b.  Alcohol purchased at the event shall not be removed from the premises of the Historic Rock Gym. 
c.  The applicant must provide a uniformed off-duty police officer stationed at the entry /exit areas to prevent alcohol from being removed from the premises. 
(b)  Special events: Town Green. 
(1)  A retail consumption license holder under this article may apply for a special event alcohol permit to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises of the Town Green. 
(2)  The following requirements must be satisfied before a license will be issued pursuant to this section for consumption on the premises at the Town Green: 
a.  Events at the Town Green shall be permitted as required by the city's special events policy. 
b.  Alcohol purchased at the event shall not be removed from the Town Green. 
c.  At least two off-duty police shall be stationed at the perimeter of the Town Green to help prevent alcohol purchased at the event from being removed from the Town Green. Vendors licensed under this section shall arrange for and share the cost of these officers. 
d.  Vendors shall ensure that any and all alcoholic beverages sold at the Town Green pursuant to this section shall be in plastic cups, plastic bottles or aluminum cans only. Glass containers are not allowed on the Town Green. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements listed above, the following shall apply to all licenses issued pursuant to this section: 
(1)  All points/locations of sale of beer or wine must be licensed and the required fees, if any, paid prior to the event. The event shall not exceed two days. 
(2)  A nonrefundable administrative fee as established by the City of Loganville must be paid at the time of filing of the application. 
(3)  Completed applications must be submitted to the city manager's office at least 60 days prior to the scheduled event unless the applicant requests expedited service. If the city is able to accommodate a request for expedited service, the applicant shall be charged a fee as established by the City of Loganville. 
(4)  The distance requirements outlined in subsection 4-65(a) shall not apply to permits issued in accordance with this subsection. 
(5)  No license shall be issued pursuant to this section unless and until a completed application is filed with the city manager that complies with all of the requirements herein. 
(6)  Failure to comply with any of the requirements imposed by this section will result in the denial of future special event alcohol permits. 
(d)  Applications for a permit under this section shall be handled in accordance with sections 4-59—4-61 of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2014(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-72. - Compliance inspections; grounds for adverse action; notice; hearing; penalties. 
(a)  Periodic inspection. Sworn officers of the police department or code enforcement officers of the city shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. The inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Automatic revocation. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license to deal in such products, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city being necessary. 
(c)  Investigations. The mayor and city council shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons; the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
(d)  Grounds for adverse action by mayor and city council. The mayor and city council may find due cause to impose a probationary period on a license; to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a license; and/or to impose a monetary fine upon the license if it finds that the licensee under this chapter or the licensee's agents, employees, or independent contractors, whether compensated or not, commits any of the following violations, each of which shall constitute grounds upon which adverse action may be taken by the mayor and city council against the licensee: 
(1)  The selling to or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person below the age of 21 years. 
(2)  The conviction of any felony reasonably related to the ability of the licensee to operate and maintain the premises in a proper manner or of any crime of moral turpitude. 
(3)  The performance of any act prohibited by this chapter or the failure to perform any act required by this chapter as well as the violation of any city or state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(5)  The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(6)  The failure to comply with any and all federal, state or municipal tax laws and regulations applicable to the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  The failure to furnish within 30 days of said request any and all data, information and/or records related to the operation of the licensed establishment when such has been requested by the city manager or mayor and city council. 
(8)  The failure to maintain any and all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license as set forth in sections 4-56, 4-58, and any other section of chapter 4 in which initial qualifications for issuance are set forth. 
(9)  The failure to obtain prior approval of the city to change the licensee's type of license pursuant to this chapter. 
(10)  Failure by the licensee to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of its employees, agents, independent contractors, patrons and others on the licensed premises or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those utilizing the premises. 
(11)  The violation of any local, state or federal law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which are reasonably related to the operation of such establishments. 
(12)  Permitting the sale of illegal drugs on the licensed premises where the licensee or the licensee's employee or agent knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(13)  Making any false statement of a material fact on the application for license or renewal thereof, or on any document required to be filed with the mayor and city council. 
(14)  Failing to give timely notice of any change of ownership interest as required by this chapter. 
(15)  The operation of the business of the licensee in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, or in a manner contrary to public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(16)  Failure to meet any obligations to pay fees, taxes or penalties imposed under the provisions of this chapter or elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Notice and hearing regarding adverse action. 
(1)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked; nor shall any monetary fine be imposed upon a licensee, without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  The mayor and city council shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of its intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license and/or to impose a monetary fine on a licensee. Such written notification shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant or licensee at the address shown on the application, and the applicant shall be directed to show cause as to why the proposed action should not be taken by the mayor and city council. The notice shall: 
a.  Advise the applicant or licensee of the time and place specified for the hearing, which hearing shall be held not more than 20 business days (if the notice is mailed) or 15 business days (if the notice is hand delivered), but not less than ten business days from the date of the service of the notice (the timing of the hearing can be shortened or extended by mutual agreement between the applicant or licensee and the city). 
b.  Shall set forth in reasonable detail the action to be taken, the grounds for such action and the factual basis supporting those grounds; and 
c.  Advise the applicant or licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses and/or arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing. 
(3)  A hearing, which shall be recorded by a court reporter, shall be conducted by the mayor and city council and the findings and final determination of the mayor and city council shall be set forth in writing. 
(4)  The mayor and city council may deny applications for transfer of location or transfer of ownership and may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor and city council may impose a fine upon any licensee holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation occurring on the licensee's licensed premises. 
(5)  The city manager, or his designee, shall send the written determination of the mayor and city council by certified mail to the applicant or licensee at the address shown on the application within three business days of the date of the action taken by the action by the mayor and city council. 
(f)  Appeal. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final unless the decision is appealed by certiorari to the superior court of the county within which lies the premises for which adverse action is being taken, which will be either Walton or Gwinnett County. Such appeal must be filed within 30 business days of the date the applicant or licensee receives the written determination by certified mail. 
(g)  Criminal prosecution. Any adverse action taken by the mayor and city council with regard to a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not preclude, and may be in addition to, any criminal prosecution by any proper authority of the city, county, state or federal government. 
(h)  No application for new license before 24 months after revocation. When a license has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter, no application for a new alcoholic beverage license for the same location will be received for a period of 24 months and no application for a new license from the licensee involved shall be received for a period of 24 months. 
(i)  Refunds. If a license issued under this chapter is denied, suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the application, license or other fees previously remitted. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 4) 
Secs. 4-73—4-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-100. - Business entrance. 
The front entrance of all premises licensed under this article shall be clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the premises are located in a private club, shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-101. - Annexed area. 
All retail consumption dealers, retail dealers and wholesale dealers operating lawfully at a location outside the corporate limits of the city and thereafter annexed into the city shall continue operation subject to this article whenever possible. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-102. - Sales on certain premises; excepted. 
(a)  No retail package dealer license shall be issued to any applicant whose business does not have at least a $15,000.00 inventory of food, tobacco products, household supplies or periodicals, the values of such items being the same as those indicated in the applicant's annual returns to the county tax commissioner for ad valorem tax purposes. In any event, the values so indicated shall be the cost of such items to the applicant and not the price that the applicant charges in retail stores. However, automotive supplies specifically shall not be considered in determining such inventory. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any retail dealer licensed by the city to sell distilled spirits by the package. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-103. - Open containers. 
(a)  No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this article, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at the place of business or elsewhere, unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter. This Code section shall not prohibit wine tasting in connection with a valid wine tasting permit under the conditions set forth in section 4-71. 
(b)  No establishment licensed under this article to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave that premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container. 
(c)  At no time shall a person be permitted to leave a premises with alcoholic beverages in an open glass container unless the customer is seated at a permitted outdoor dining restaurant. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-104. - Brown-bagging. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brown-bagging means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business licensed to operate within the city but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises; provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. 
(b)  Brown-bagging shall include the following prohibited acts: 
(1)  Any person who brown-bags; 
(2)  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
(3)  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy; 
(4)  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(c)  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(d)  The license of any premises upon which brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation of the license by the city. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of brown-bagging shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation consideration or proceeding. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-105. - Business hours—Sales by retail consumption dealers. 
(a)  With the exception of Sundays, retail consumption dealers may sell, dispense or deliver alcoholic beverages to any customer between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. On Sundays, retail consumption dealers may sell, dispense or deliver alcoholic beverages to any customer between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for retail consumption dealers to fail to remove from their retail service area within normal access to the public any and all cans, bottles, glasses, mugs, pitchers, cups or other containers for alcoholic beverages or to otherwise allow consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises except during the times set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5; Ord. of 8-13-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 4-106. - Same—Sales by wholesale dealers. 
Wholesale dealers shall engage in their business only from sunrise to sunset. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-107. - Same—Sales by retail package dealers. 
Retail dealers of malt beverages and/or wine by the package shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays and between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. Retail dealers of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-108. - Sales on election days. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. In this section, the term "day" means that period of time beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-109. - Change of time affecting closing hours. 
On those days when the time changes, a licensee shall determine closing hour at the end of the business day by the same time on which he opened that regular business day. The closing hour for the sale and purchase of spirituous liquors, malt beverages or wine under this section shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  On the day when the time changes from Eastern Standard Time to Daylight Saving Time, the closing hour shall be determined by Eastern Standard Time. 
(2)  On the day when the time changes from Daylight Saving Time to Eastern Standard Time, the closing hour shall be determined by Daylight Saving Time. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-110. - Vacating premises. 
Notwithstanding any other local regulation, whenever a closing time is provided, the premises shall be vacated within 30 minutes by all except personnel of such establishment, and no alcoholic beverages shall be dispensed after such closing time. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
State Law reference— Days and hours of sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-111. - Delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
No deliveries of alcoholic beverages shall be made except on the premises in which such beverages are sold. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-112. - Condition of premises. 
All premises operating with a license under this article shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-113. - Slot machines, etc., prohibited on-premises. 
No licensee shall permit on his premises any slot machines, pinball machines or electronic games of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines operated for gambling purposes. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-114. - Disturbances, obscenity, public indecency prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises of any establishment licensed under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-115. - Leaving premises without paying. 
No person shall leave the premises of the licensee without paying his charges for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-116. - Interior visibility. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail dealer's store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-117. - Display of city license number. 
Each retail dealer licensed under this article to sell shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription "City Retail License No. ____________" in uniform letters not less than four inches in height; however, if a licensee so desires he may have his name displayed on the inside of the window in like manner or in neon or other electric lights. Such sign shall be parallel with the window and so constructed as not to extend more than six inches from the window. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-118. - Posting signs—Concerning age restrictions. 
The retail licensee shall post in a conspicuous place where the actual transaction takes place within the licensed premises a sign stating that no alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquors shall be sold to or purchased by any person under 21 years of age and that it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee. Such sign shall be printed in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
State Law reference— Signs relative to underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 4-119. - Same—Prohibiting on-premises consumption. 
The retail package dealer licensee shall display at any entrances or exits to the licensed premises a sign which shall state that it is unlawful to consume any alcoholic beverages (except at a permitted wine tasting) or to open any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or any parking area adjacent thereto. Further, such signs which are necessary shall also be placed in such a manner as to be visible from any parking area adjacent to the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-120. - Condition of signs. 
All signs required by this division shall be clearly visible and lettering shall be dark and unfaded. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-121. - Prices. 
(a)  Each retail package dealer shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale and one printed copy of these regulations; provided that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed price list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where the alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(b)  All retail consumption dealers hereunder, except bona fide private clubs, shall display in prominent places their current prices of alcoholic beverages and admission and cover charges. 
(c)  Licensees shall file a copy of their price lists with the city clerk and shall furnish to any customer that so desires an itemized bill of charges which shall not exceed the price list furnished to the police department. Upon any increase or decrease of prices, a new list must be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-122. - Broken seals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensee, his manager or agent in charge of licensed premises, to carry into or have in his possession on any premises any alcoholic beverages in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other contrary provisions, any restaurant which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off-premises, if the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal on the restaurant's premises. A partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its employees before removal from the premises. The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently opened or tampered with, and a dated receipt for the bottle of wine and meal shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
State Law reference— Breaking of packages of alcohol on premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26; removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
Sec. 4-123. - Sales outside premises in permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the place of business licensed for such sale except as permitted in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-124. - Reuse of bottles. 
It shall be illegal for the licensee under this article to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-125. - Copy of regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the management of the premises licensed under this article to maintain a copy of these regulations on such premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-126. - Verification of age. 
(a)  It shall unlawful for any agent, officer or employee of a licensee to fail to properly check the identification of any patron when selling or otherwise providing any alcoholic beverage, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in his possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by any governmental agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph and such person's date of birth. As used herein, the term "identification" includes without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, a driver's license, or a state department of public safety identification card. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution which may result from a violation of this section, any licensee employing any officer, agent or employee that fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, which failure results in an underaged person being sold or served, or to have in his possession while on the licensee's premises an alcoholic beverage, may have his license revoked. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
State Law reference— Verification of age, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-127. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in billiard and pool rooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to keep, operate or maintain billiard tables, pool tables or any other table of like character on such licensed premises, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For retail consumption dealers, the licensee derives at least 75 percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages; or 
(2)  For retail package dealers, the licensee derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-128. - Sale or dispensing from drive-through windows prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for retail dealers to sell, dispense or deliver alcoholic beverages to any customer unless such sale, dispensing or delivery shall occur completely within the structured interior walls of the retail dealer's business. 
(b)  No sale, dispensing or delivery of alcoholic beverages shall occur through any drive-through window or other opening in the structural walls of the business. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-129. - Fire regulations. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed, the same shall be judged by reasonable standards. The fire department shall, upon the request of the city clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings. All premises licensed under this article shall conform at all times with the fire regulations established by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-130. - Drinks to be served only by employees. 
Drinks sold by licensees under this article shall be served only by employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-131. - Service in back rooms prohibited. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not normally open to the general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions which have been scheduled in advance may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-132. - Live nudity and sexually explicit conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol beverage establishment means any licensee holding a license under this article for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Substantially nude means dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola. 
(b)  Prohibited acts enumerated. 
(1)  No person shall appear substantially nude in any establishment holding a license to sell alcohol. 
(2)  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
(3)  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform live acts of or live acts which constitute or simulate: 
a.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety, shall not constitute violations of this section. 
c.  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowing of any contests, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity, where patrons of a licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (b)(3)a and b of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum, or theater which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Acts prohibited. No person shall engage in any of the acts identified in subsection (b)(3) of this section on the premises of an alcoholic beverage establishment. 
(d)  Application of restrictions. The restrictions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall apply to all persons physically present and only physically present on the licensed premises regardless of whether such persons are categorized as employees, patrons, independent contractors or otherwise. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation of business license. In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation action, which shall follow the procedures outlined in this article. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of violation of this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-133. - Pricing. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner so as to be in view of the paying public, and such schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(b)  Except as authorized by a valid wine tasting permit addressed in section 4-71, no licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons at any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time; 
(7)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
(8)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, provided all patrons are allowed equal access to such free food, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person. Otherwise no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Sec. 4-134. - Security cameras required for certain establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Any licensee who sells any alcoholic beverage packages to go, is hereby required to install a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area with camera and lens of a type, number and location approved by the chief of police department. Such cameras must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on file or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. 
(b)  Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation at all hours in which such establishment is open for business. The camera shall be subject to periodic inspection by city personnel. In the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must have the camera repaired or have availability of a backup camera system within a ten-day period of time. In addition, in the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must immediately notify the city clerk or his designee. If a crime occurs or an employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the film retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(c)  Violation of any provision under this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  On a first offense there shall be a minimum fine of $250.00. In addition to said fine, the judge of the municipal court may impose, at his discretion, a suspension of all city alcoholic beverage licenses at the establishment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)  On the second offense, if within 12 months of the first, there shall be a fine of $1,000.00. In addition to said fine, the judge of the municipal court may impose, at his discretion, a suspension of all alcoholic beverage licenses at the establishment for a minimum of 60 days. 
(3)  Any further offenses shall subject the licensee to automatic revocation of the alcohol license. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2012, § 5) 
Secs. 4-135—4-160. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; Carnival Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center means any business whose primary function is to provide for the amusement of its patrons by providing access to mechanical amusement devices as specified in this section. 
Mechanical amusement device means any machine, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, pool and billiard tables (mechanical or otherwise), and all games, operations, or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. 
Person, firm, corporation or association means and includes the following: any person, firm, corporation, or association which owns any such machines; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine. 
(Code 1994, § 18-301) 
Sec. 6-20. - Gambling devices not permitted. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law. 
(Code 1994, § 18-302) 
Sec. 6-21. - Minors playing during school hours. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall be allowed within or on the premises of any amusement center as described in section 6-19 to which a license has been issued by the city under this article during the hours school is in session, from beginning time to dismissal. 
(Code 1994, § 18-309) 
Sec. 6-22. - Closing time. 
No amusement center shall be open past 11:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, and 12:00 midnight Friday and Saturday, except for billiard rooms which shall be open until 12:00 midnight Monday through Thursday. 
(Code 1994, § 18-310) 
Sec. 6-23. - Days of operation. 
Amusement centers may operate Monday through Saturday; and must be closed on Sundays. 
(Code 1994, § 18-311) 
Secs. 6-24—6-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-50. - Required. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical amusement device shall obtain a license from the city upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the council upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 18-303) 
Sec. 6-51. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date, and place of birth, county of residence, length of time at current address; 
(2)  Prior convictions of the applicant, if any; 
(3)  Place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place; and 
(4)  The description of the machine to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer, and serial number, number of billiard tables and size. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he is over 18 years of age and a resident of the United States. 
(c)  No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant shall have shown proof of bond in the amount not less than $500.00. 
(d)  The police chief of the city will fingerprint the applicant, and provide a background check through G.C.I.C. (Georgia Crime Information Center). Issuance of a license will be based on the police chief's investigation of the applicant's background. 
(Code 1994, § 18-304) 
Sec. 6-52. - Fees. 
Every applicant, before being granted a license for an amusement center, shall pay the sum established by the city. Other businesses licensed (nonamusement centers) shall also pay the license fee established by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 18-305) 
Sec. 6-53. - Display; transferability. 
(a)  Each license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(b)  The license may be transferred from one machine to another similar machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall operate under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated. 
(c)  If the licensee moves his place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. 
(Code 1994, § 18-307) 
Sec. 6-54. - Revocation. 
Every license issued under this article is subject to the right, which is expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any mechanical, amusement device contrary to the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the state. The license may be revoked by the council after written notice to the licensee if the licensee is found to be guilty of any violations. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee. At the hearing the licensee and/or his attorney may be present and submit evidence and/or witnesses in his defense. 
(Code 1994, § 18-308) 
Secs. 6-55—6-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade (five percent or more) in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means and includes the following as defined herein: adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult video store, erotic dance establishment, escort bureau, introduction services, adult store, adult hotel or motel, and lingerie modeling studios. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant portion of its stock in trade (five percent or more) or devotes a significant portion (five percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products or articles which may be designed, sold or viewed for use in connection with specified sexual activities as defined herein, or which may be sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade (five percent or more) in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
Church means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Establishment for minors means a business or other establishment whose advertising and services are directed primarily towards minors. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character that has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Licensed day care center means a facility licensed by the state that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Lingerie modeling studio means any place or commercial establishment wherein the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or is required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
School means a building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" includes any establishment used for any educational purpose, including but not limited to tutoring. 
Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, beastiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts of conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § II) 
Sec. 6-83. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments so that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed, thereby preventing increased allocation and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of increased criminal behavior. The council also seek to prevent diminution in property values and deleterious effects on the quality of life in neighborhoods and other areas of the city caused by adult entertainment establishments. 
(b)  Findings. Accordingly, after considering various studies concerning the effects of adult entertainment establishments and the opinions of law enforcement regarding these establishments, the council find that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community to regulate adult entertainment establishments as provided herein. The regulation of adult entertainment establishments is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide or establish adult entertainment or adult uses. To that end, the council adopts this article. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § I) 
Sec. 6-84. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action, or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The city may take such other steps and may apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XXI) 
Sec. 6-85. - Abatement. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XXV) 
Sec. 6-86. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XXII) 
Sec. 6-87. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XXIII) 
Sec. 6-88. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XXIV) 
Sec. 6-89. - Adult entertainment operations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ a person under the age of 18 years or a person not of good moral character as defined in this article. 
(c)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(e)  Adult entertainment establishments shall not allow the depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities to be visible from any point outside the structure. 
(f)  Erotic dance establishments. 
(1)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(2)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(3)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(4)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(5)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(6)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(7)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(8)  All areas of an erotic dance establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "full lighting" means illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § III) 
Sec. 6-90. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether or not licensed as an adult entertainment establishment under this article, shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § IV) 
Sec. 6-91. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § VII) 
Sec. 6-92. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § VIII) 
Sec. 6-93. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, playground, or establishment catering to minors is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  On less than one acre of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage if the establishment is freestanding. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by straight-line measurement from the wall of the proposed or existing freestanding building or outermost wall of the leased space of a multi-tenant building which will house the proposed establishment. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § IX) 
Secs. 6-94—6-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-115. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to operate an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein unless such establishment shall have a currently valid license from the city which license shall not be expired, suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § VI) 
Sec. 6-116. - Application. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee established by the city shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XI) 
Sec. 6-117. - Information required. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age, i.e., a driver's license or other state-issued photo identification; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the share of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including article violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one if its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit if any, last annual report if any; 
(17)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(19)  A plat by a registered surveyor, licensed by the state, certifying that the location of the proposed premises complies with the requirements of section 6-93; 
(20)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct if the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, by the individual; 
b.  A partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  A corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  Any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XII) 
Sec. 6-118. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by the city, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XIII) 
Sec. 6-119. - Application investigation. 
The city manager shall act upon the application within 30 days of receipt of the application. Failure to act upon the application within the specified time frame shall result in issuance of a license under this article. The city manager shall grant the permit if the city manager finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, is of good moral character as defined herein; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date of business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed adult entertainment establishment complies with the location requirements imposed under section 6-93; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XIV) 
Sec. 6-120. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XV) 
Sec. 6-121. - License refusal; appeals. 
(a)  If the city manager, following investigation of the applicant, finds that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the city manager shall notify the city clerk of such finding within 30 days of the date of the application. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such finding. 
(b)  Any applicant who is denied a license under this article may appeal such denial to the council within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by submitting a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(c)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(d)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The council may either affirm or overturn the city manager's decision by majority vote. An applicant may appeal the decision of the council to the superior court by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XVI) 
Sec. 6-122. - Renewal. 
Any license issued hereunder shall automatically expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which it was issued. Any adult entertainment establishment licensee who wishes to continue the operation of an adult entertainment establishment must submit an application in compliance with this article by October 1. Each application for renewal of a license issued under this article will be considered as a new application. Accordingly, no licensee shall obtain a vested right to the renewal of a license issued under this article. The renewal fees for adult entertainment establishment permits shall be as established by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XVII) 
Sec. 6-123. - Nontransferability. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(b)  An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XVIII) 
Sec. 6-124. - Change of location, name, or ownership. 
Any change of location, name, or ownership of an adult entertainment establishment shall require the submission of a new application under this article and the issuance of a new license. 
(Ord. of 2-9-2006, § XIX) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Provision of services; authority. 
The city authorizes the Gwinnett County and Walton County animal control departments to provide animal control services for the residents of the city with respect to the county in which the resident lives within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, § 17-101) 
Sec. 8-2. - County policies adopted by reference. 
The city adopts the animal control ordinances of Gwinnett County and Walton County including all rules, regulations and enforcement policies of the Gwinnett County and Walton County animal control departments in effect on the date of adopting of the ordinance codified in this chapter and any and all subsequent amendments thereto. All violations of such ordinances, rules and regulations shall be governed by the appropriate courts of Gwinnett County and Walton County, respectively. All license fees, fines, levies or any other revenue collected pursuant to such ordinances, rules, regulations and enforcement policies shall be retained by Gwinnett County and Walton County, respectively, to defray the cost of operating the respective animal control units and the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 17-102) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Hotel/motels; definitions and regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guest suite means an accommodation with two or more contiguous rooms comprising a compartment with or without doors between such rooms providing living, sleeping, sanitary, and storage facilities. 
Guestroom means an accommodation in a hotel combining living, sleeping, sanitary, and storage facilities within a compartment. 
Hotels means buildings or groups of buildings under the same management in which there are sleeping accommodations for more than 16 persons primarily used by transients (those who occupy accommodations for less than 30 days) for lodging with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel, or by any other name. 
Occupant load means the number of persons for whom egress is to be provided and shall be determined on the basis of one person per 200 sq. ft. (18.6 sq. m.) of gross floor area or the maximum probable population of any room or section under consideration, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  No hotel or motel may be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium. 
(2)  No hotel or motel shall be constructed with a combination of less than 50 guestrooms or guest suites. Lodging is not to exceed ten days with the exclusion of five rooms for longterm stay. The term "longterm stay" shall be further described and defined as an individual guest registering, residing in, or occupying a room within the same facility for more than 45 days in any 90-day period, nor shall any guests move from one room to another without a three-day vacancy in between. 
(3)  No outside storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be permitted. 
(4)  No business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guestroom of the facility. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2001, § 4-106) 
Secs. 10-2—10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 10-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain for trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), an example being the various departments within a certain business; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, receipts of charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services that are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by the city as a revenue-raising ordinance. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-101)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 10-22. - Exempt businesses. 
(a)  No occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Disabled veterans of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the United States armed forces was involved, whether under United States command or otherwise, provided such person provides the city with a certificate of exemption issued by the commissioner of veterans service; 
(2)  Blind persons; 
(3)  Veterans of peacetime service in the United States armed forces who have a physical disability which was incurred during that service; 
(4)  A local board of education; and 
(5)  Any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor acting pursuant to a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair. 
(b)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Real estate brokers, except at the principal or branch office of a real estate broker; 
(3)  Motor vehicles required to be registered with the public service commission; 
(4)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(5)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(6)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusinesses; 
(7)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(8)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(9)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(10)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(11)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(12)  Any business on which the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(c)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-102)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-13, 48-13-16. 
Sec. 10-23. - New and renewal registration required. 
(a)  Every business within the city or any business doing or engaging in business within the city is required annually to have an occupation tax permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the city limits, unless city licensing or taxing is prohibited under state law or the activity is exempted by this article. 
(b)  Every person required to pay an occupation tax, including a renewal occupation tax, shall submit an application to the city clerk or designee of the city clerk on a form to be provided by the city clerk or designee of the city clerk. 
(c)  Any person required to pay an occupation tax under this article who changes the business location, owner or name from one name to another shall begin the occupation tax permit process from the beginning, as if opening a new business. Occupation tax permits are not transferable from one business to another. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-1); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 10-24. - Classifications of persons who owe occupational tax. 
(a)  The following shall be subject to an occupational tax: 
(1)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city that has a location within the city; 
(2)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city with no location or office in the state if such person: 
a.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
b.  Owns personal or real property within the city that generates income. 
(b)  For persons qualifying under subsection (a)(2) of this section, the following additional rules shall apply: 
(1)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall be required to pay occupation tax only to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall apply only when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of the applicability of this subsection (b)(1). 
(2)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state that purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-2)) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6(b), 48-13-7(b). 
Sec. 10-25. - Taxation classification criteria for persons other than professionals classified under state law. 
(a)  Generally. In determining the amount of occupation tax to be levied on an individual business or practitioner, the city classifies all businesses or practitioners by the same combination of criteria: Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nation-wide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  Tax rate for specific business type. An occupation tax shall be levied based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages utilized by the city. Each type of business shall be assigned to a profit class based on the profitability ratio for that business type. The occupational tax rate levied will be based on the profit class of the dominant line of the business as defined by the standard industrial classification system. Gross receipts shall be defined as set forth in section 10-21. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as provided in subsection (c) of this section and will be developed and updated annually by the city based on variables of changing budget requirements and gross receipts. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule. 

 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-3.1)) 
State Law reference— Permissible classification criteria, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 10-26. - Taxation classification criteria for professionals. 
(a)  This section applies to practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18), including the following: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-20 et seq.; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape surveyors; 
(11)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(12)  Public accountants; 
(13)  Embalmers; 
(14)  Funeral directors; 
(15)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; 
(16)  Architects; 
(17)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors; 
(18)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
(19)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public; provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
(20)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(21)  Any other business, profession or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(b)  Those persons listed in subsection (a) of this section shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts in combination with the profitability ratios as provided in section 10-25; or 
(2)  A tax of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, the practitioner electing to pay such fee per practitioner shall not be required to provide information to the city relating to the gross receipts of the practitioner. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-3.2)) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 10-27. - Limitations on occupation tax—Businesses with additional location outside the city. 
(a)  In levying occupation tax upon a business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, including businesses or practitioners with one or more locations or offices in the state and one or more locations outside the state, the city shall allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner for occupation tax purposes in accordance with one of the following methods: 
(1)  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, the city shall tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the city; or 
(2)  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in the state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in the state and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(b)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed 100 percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(c)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the city as to the allocation under this section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(d)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-4.1)) 
Sec. 10-28. - Same—Businesses with more than one type of service or product. 
For businesses or practitioners with more than one type of service or product, the total occupation tax shall be determined by apportioning the gross receipts by category of service or product in proportion to the gross receipts generated by each service or product and taxing each portion of the gross receipts according to the profitability ratio for that particular type of business. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-4.2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-12, 48-13-14. 
Sec. 10-29. - Tax imposed on attorneys. 
(a)  The imposition of an occupation tax and any registration requirements of this article shall not constitute a condition precedent to the practice of law by attorneys. Further, this article shall not be deemed to require an attorney to provide confidential billing records to the city. 
(b)  As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, an occupation tax is imposed on attorneys for income earned within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  Any attorney who paid an occupation tax for any previous year under the city's previous occupational tax ordinance may at his option instruct the city clerk or designee of the city clerk to apply that payment to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-5.1); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 10-30. - Calculation of amount of tax. 
An attorney who practices law in the jurisdiction of the city shall elect to have his tax rate determined in the manner set forth in subsection 10-26(b). 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-5.2)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Dates when taxes are due and become delinquent; amount of interest and penalties. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, an attorney shall not be required to pay the occupation tax on the income generated from the practice of law in any given year, beginning with and including calendar year 2008, until April 1 of the following year. The tax may be paid in person at city hall or by mailing the tax to the city clerk or designee of the city clerk. Any tax payment made by mail shall include the name and address of the person or law firm paying the tax and the name of each attorney whose tax is being paid, so that the city clerk or designee of the city clerk may process the payment. Attorneys who pays the occupation tax on their own behalf shall include the name of the law firm with which they practice, if any. Any tax paid pursuant to the option of subsection 10-26(b)(1) shall include a written submission containing sufficient information to enable the city clerk or designee of the city clerk to determine the accuracy of the taxpayer's calculation. 
(b)  Taxes due from attorneys under this section are due on April 1. Such taxes shall not be considered delinquent until July 1. An attorney who does not pay the tax prior to July 1 shall incur a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. Any taxes not paid by the due date shall be subject to penalties contained in section 10-40. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this section for any attorney to willfully and intentionally misrepresent a material fact in an affidavit to avoid the payment of the occupation tax imposed by this article. The enforcement action to be taken by the city is set forth as follows: When the city clerk or designee of the city clerk has reason to believe that an attorney has willfully and intentionally misrepresented a material fact in any affidavit submitted to the city clerk or designee of the city clerk for the purposes of avoiding full payment of the occupation tax, the city clerk or designee of the city clerk shall consult with the city attorney to determine whether such conduct should be referred to the state bar for investigation as to whether a violation of the Georgia Rules of Professional Conduct has occurred. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-5.3); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 10-32. - Each line of business to be reported. 
Each business shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts in its occupation tax application. No business shall conduct any line of business without first obtaining an occupation tax permit for that line of business. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-6)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Inclusion of administrative fee. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  Any person or business subject to an occupation tax under this article who moves from one location to another shall notify the city clerk or designee of the city clerk in writing of the move and the new address on a form provided by the city clerk or designee of the city clerk no later than the day of moving. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-103-7); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
State Law reference— Administrative fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(e). 
Sec. 10-34. - Imposition and collection of regulatory fee. 
(a)  The city customarily performs investigations and inspections of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare of the city and in the course of enforcing state and local building, health or safety codes. 
(b)  The regulatory fee set forth in the schedule of fees is not a means of raising revenue for general purposes; instead, the regulatory fee approximates the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-104)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Businesses subject to regulatory fee. 
(a)  Except as to those professionals classified under state law and listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), the city shall impose and collect a regulatory fee on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations doing business within the city, whether or not said businesses and practitioners have a location within the city. 
(b)  Examples of businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations that are subject to the regulatory fee include, but are expressly not limited to the following: 
(1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers; 
(2)  Carnivals; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; 
(4)  Tattoo artists; 
(5)  Stables; 
(6)  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
(7)  Scrap metal processors; 
(8)  Pawnbrokers; 
(9)  Food service establishments; 
(10)  Dealers in precious metals; 
(11)  Firearms dealers; 
(12)  Peddlers; 
(13)  Parking lots; 
(14)  Nursing and personal care homes; 
(15)  Newspaper vending boxes; 
(16)  Modeling agencies; 
(17)  Massage parlors; 
(18)  Landfills; 
(19)  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(20)  Boardinghouses; 
(21)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
(22)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(23)  Hotels and motels; 
(24)  Hypnotists; 
(25)  Handwriting analysts; 
(26)  Health clubs, gyms and spas; 
(27)  Fortunetellers; 
(28)  Garbage collectors; 
(29)  Escort services; 
(30)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; and 
(31)  Locksmiths. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-104.1)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Calculation of regulatory fee. 
The regulatory fee is a flat fee for each business, profession or occupation and is as established by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-104.2)) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fee, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8, 48-13-9, 48-13-9.1. 
Sec. 10-37. - Tax imposed on life insurers. 
Each life insurance company doing business within the city shall pay to the city a tax of one percent of the gross direct premiums, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, which are received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the city. This tax shall not apply to annuity considerations. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-105)) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 10-38. - When taxes due. 
(a)  All occupation taxes and the corresponding administrative fee authorized by this article, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall be due and payable annually by January 1 st of each year. In the event that any person commences business on any date after the date specified in this section, the occupation tax and corresponding administrative fee shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business. 
(b)  All regulatory fees authorized by this article shall be paid annually before commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation for the year, as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession or occupation. 
(c)  The regulatory fee may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health, comfort or safety of one or more individuals or protection of property. This subsection shall apply to, but not be limited to, the repair, service or installation of heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment or systems; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the city within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation and any and all required inspections are made in order to ensure compliance with applicable codes; and 
(4)  The work is commenced or the services are provided within 24 hours of receiving the request for such work or service and it is not possible for the person conducting the work or providing the service to obtain a permit prior to commencing due to the hours of operation of the city's offices. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-106-1); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 1; Ord. of 6-12-2014(2), § 3) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of fees and taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20. 
Sec. 10-39. - Business commencing after July 1. 
(a)  When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner from the commencement of the business. 
(b)  The administrative fee authorized by this chapter shall not be reduced. 
(c)  A practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his occupation tax the amount described in section 10-26 shall receive no reduction in such amount. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-106-2); Ord. of 6-12-2014(2), § 4) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 10-40. - Failure to pay; penalties. 
(a)  Should any occupation tax or administrative fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the tax or fee, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due plus interest on the delinquent amount at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(b)  Should any regulatory fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the fee, the person liable for the fee shall be subject to and shall pay interest on the delinquent amount at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(c)  Should any occupation tax, administrative fee or regulatory fee imposed by this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date of the fee, in addition to the penalties listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city municipal court may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the tax and/or fee. The civil fine for nonpayment of the occupation tax or regulatory fee shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-106-3)) 
Sec. 10-41. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  The city clerk or designee of the city clerk shall, within his discretion and to the extent possible, administer and enforce the provisions of this article, perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk or designee of the city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing; any penalty imposed by section 10-40; and any interest imposed by section 10-40. 
(b)  The city clerk or designee of the city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing, penalties, or interest. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed or ruled invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax and/or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the tax and/or fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk or designee of the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charge for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 to be imposed by the municipal court of the city. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax, shall be subject to the same penalty as persons who fail to pay the tax. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain the required certificate or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-106-4); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
State Law reference— Penalties, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-21, 48-13-26. 
Sec. 10-42. - Duty to post permit in place of business. 
(a)  All persons shall exhibit and display all permits issued to them under this article in some conspicuous place in their business establishment to which address the license or registration was issued. 
(b)  Each person subject to any special or occupation tax who is also licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-107)) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-23. 
Sec. 10-43. - Evidence of qualification required. 
(a)  Any business that is required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall show evidence of qualification. 
(b)  Any business which is required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before an occupational tax permit is issued. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-108)) 
Sec. 10-44. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law. 
This occupation tax is not levied upon the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-109)) 
Sec. 10-45. - Basis for occupation taxes; adjustments based on actual receipts. 
(a)  Estimates to be used. All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for convenience of both city and the taxpayer and the necessity of making numerous returns, those businesses subject to the occupation tax shall, on or before the times set forth in this article, file with the city clerk or designee of the city clerk the returns specifically provided for in this section, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as an estimate for making payments on the occupation tax for current calendar year, the actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in a current calendar year to be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the termination of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this article. 
(b)  Return and other documents required; date due. The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer or the business subject to such occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year and on or before April 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk or designee of the city clerk, on a form furnished by the revenue collection officer, a signed return, setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year, to be used as an estimate of the gross receipts for the current year. The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to such occupation tax shall also provide its federal tax return or a letter from the business' certified public accountant stating gross income for the preceding year. 
(c)  Estimate for partial year to be prorated. Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in such return. Such return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, which figure shall bear the same ratio to the amount of gross receipts for such part year as the full year bears to such part. Such figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year. 
(d)  Verification of reports. The amount of gross receipts reported pursuant to this article is subject to verification by a certified public accountant selected by the city. Occupational tax permit holders subject to such verification shall be selected on a periodic random basis. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-110-1); Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 3) 
Sec. 10-46. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15(c), information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to the city for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure under O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). 
(b)  Information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to the city for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of the collection of the occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay the occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-110-2)) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 10-47. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax and/or regulatory fee provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes and/or regulatory fees upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 1(18-111)) 
Sec. 10-48. - Procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in section 10-45 and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation tax actually paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection 10-45(a), the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on or before Apri1 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in section 10-45 and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection10-45(a), the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said city during the current year, such difference in any amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-12-2009, § 2; Ord. of 6-12-2014(2), § 5) 
Secs. 10-49—10-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; local regulation of massage, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of any crime involving sexual misconduct or any crime of moral turpitude. 
Massage means any manner of manipulation, including, but not limited to, the rubbing, touching, stroking, kneading or vibrating of the superficial parts of the body, by direct or indirect physical contact with any portion of the body of a massage technician or by any form of contact with a massage apparatus. The term "massage" shall not include: diagnosis; the prescribing of drugs or medicines; spinal or other joint manipulations; the use of range of motion stretches by professionals, including but not limited to, personal trainers and yoga instructors; limited massage or massage therapy provided by athletic trainers, barbers, or cosmetologists licensed by the state; the use of a hydro-bed during which the client is fully clothed; or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, massage therapy, or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage technician, for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage establishment means any business establishment for profit which employs one or more massage technicians, or owns and operates for profit one or more massage apparatuses defined in this section and also including, but not limited to, bathhouse equipment and which, for a good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. This term shall include the administration of massages or massage therapy off-site (i.e., including, but not limited to, the client's home or place of business). This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage technician/massage therapist/masseur/masseuse means any person, whether male or female, whether or not a masseur or masseuse by profession, who, by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another, or by use and operation of a massage apparatus as herein defined, and for any good or valuable consideration, administers a massage. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. The term "massage therapy" shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-701) 
Sec. 10-69. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the certificate or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city, county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: 
(1)  Any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, registered nurse, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of said profession. 
(2)  Any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(3)  Any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the state. 
(4)  Any person who is a licensed massage therapist or the holder of a valid provisional permit issued by the state board of massage therapy. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-702) 
Sec. 10-70. - Names of employees to be filed with chief of police. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding a massage establishment license to file with the chief of police of the city the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all employees who are not massage technicians/therapists. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees must be filed with the chief of police within three days from the date of any such change. 
(Ord. of 3-8-2008, § 18-711) 
Sec. 10-71. - Hours of operation. 
No massage establishment shall engage in such business or profession except between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:30 p.m.; nor shall any operator of a massage establishment or business operate the same except within and between those hours. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-712) 
Secs. 10-72—10-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-101. - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage technician to administer massages without first having obtained a massage therapist license or provisional permit from the state. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-703) 
Sec. 10-102. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the city manager, and said application shall be in writing. As used in this section, the term "applicant" applies equally to a natural person, a corporation, or other entity. 
(b)  Information required. Such application shall be in writing, addressed to the city manager, and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant and all employees, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant and all employees; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant and all employees within the two years immediately preceding the date of application and prior to the current address; 
(3)  Written proof that the applicant and all employees are over the age of 21 years; 
(4)  The applicant's and all employees' height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(5)  Two current photographs of the applicant and all employees at least two inches by two inches in size; 
(6)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant and all employees for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(7)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant and all employees, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(8)  All convictions of violations of any laws by the applicant and all employees, and the grounds therefor; 
(9)  The applicant and all employees shall be fingerprinted by the city, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the information required in subsection (b) of this section and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent or partner, general or limited. 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation, in addition to the information required in this section, such corporation shall submit a complete list of the stockholders of the corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(e)  Investigative fee. Each application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall include an investigative fee of $500.00. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-705; Ord. of 2-14-2013, § 1) 
Sec. 10-103. - Requirements. 
(a)  Operator qualifications. No applicant, natural or corporate, may be issued a license for a massage establishment unless he first possesses the following qualifications: 
(1)  Any natural person applying for a license to operate a massage establishment must be a licensed massage therapist or must have a provisional permit to operate as a massage therapist. A partnership or corporate applicant must show that all partners, general or limited, and all employees or agents possess the same license and/or permit; 
(2)  A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. 
(b)  Documentation, etc. No license shall be issued unless the application and all the attached documentation and exhibits have been filed by the applicant, and in no case shall the license be issued where it appears that the application has been materially falsified, or where the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
(c)  Premises requirements. No license to operate a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment; provided also that such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code, including, but not limited to, chapters 111 and 119; 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the building code; and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the building code; 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
(7)  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons; 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted; 
(10)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in complete compliance with the city fire code, electrical, code, plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-704) 
Sec. 10-104. - Application approval or denial; appeal. 
(a)  If the city manager, following investigation of the applicant, finds that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the city manager shall notify the city clerk of such finding within 30 days of the date of the application. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such finding. 
(b)  Any applicant who is denied a license under this article may appeal such denial to the city council within ten days after has been notified of an adverse determination by submitting a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(c)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(d)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties, and from city staff. The council may either affirm or overturn the city manager's decision by majority vote. An applicant may appeal the decision of the council to the superior court by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-706) 
Sec. 10-105. - Nontransferability; change of location; display required; inspections. 
(a)  Nontransferability. All licenses issued hereunder are nontransferable; provided, however, that a change in location of a massage establishment may be permitted pursuant to the provisions herein. 
(b)  Change of location. A change of location of the massage premises shall be approved by the city manager, provided all general ordinances are complied with and the change of location fee of $50.00 is first paid. 
(c)  Display. Every person, natural or corporate, to whom a license has been granted, shall display the license in a conspicuous place. 
(d)  Inspections. At least four times each year, an inspection of each massage establishment may be made for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this article are met. Notice may or may not be given of such inspection and no warrant shall be required. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-707) 
Sec. 10-106. - Revocation—Notice. 
(a)  No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the chairperson of the public safety committee to determine just cause of such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder of the license and shall designate the time and place where the hearing will be held. 
(b)  The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the event the license holder cannot be found, and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-708) 
Sec. 10-107. - Same—Grounds. 
The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The holder has employed any person who is not a licensed massage technician and has allowed or permitted such person to administer massages in the establishment; 
(2)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, county or municipal laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants; 
(3)  The premises are in violation of the building code; 
(4)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(5)  The holder of the license, or any of its employees or agents, has been convicted of, or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any charge of sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, or has been convicted of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(6)  The holder of the license or any of its employees has allowed to occur or has engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-709) 
Sec. 10-108. - Same—Time allowance for disposition of inventory. 
In the event the license of an operator under this article is suspended or revoked for some violation of this article, the mayor shall provide a period of time not to exceed 15 days for the holder of such license to dispose of his inventory. 
(Ord. of 6-14-2007, § 18-710) 
Secs. 10-109—10-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; authority to regulate pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-130. - Records. 
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall furnish to the city manager or designee each day a list of every item pledged with him or sold to him during the previous day. Such list may be a copy of information required to be kept by O.C.G.A. title 44, ch. 12, art. III, pt. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.). or any other list maintained containing the same information. The furnishing of such list shall be in conjunction with and in addition to the maintaining of those records required by state law and shall in no way be considered as relieving such person of the duty to maintain these records, or to make them available for inspection as required by state law. In addition to the information contained in the above reports shall include the following information: 
(1)  Contents of daily report. Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the Walton County division of police service and the city manager or designee, on such forms as may be prescribed by the city manager or designee, of all articles pledged, traded or bought by him during the 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the city manager or designee, the reports will show: 
a.  Name and addresses of the pawnbroker; 
b.  Date and time of transaction; 
c.  Serial number of the pawn ticket; 
d.  Amount paid or advanced; 
e.  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, as well as the number of stones in jewelry and whether the jewelry is commonly worn by a male or female, and all identifying names, marks, and numbers; and 
f.  Description of persons selling or pawning, including name, address, date of birth, driver's license number, social security number, race, weight and height. 
Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of being in violation of this section. 
(2)  Fingerprinting, etc., required. In addition to other records and information as called for in subsection (1) of this section, the pawnbroker shall obtain, from each person pawning any article, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the article or articles shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms approved by the city manager or designee, and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the form furnished. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained from all persons each time such persons pawn any article with such pawnbroker regardless of whether or not that person may have previously pawned an article with such pawnbroker and had been fingerprinted. 
(3)  Photograph required. In addition to the other records and information as called for, the pawnbroker shall photograph with 35 mm color film each customer with the photograph showing the pawnbroker's ticket and/or transaction number. This photograph shall be reduced to a negative form and maintained by the pawnbroker as a permanent record for a period of four years. 
(Code 1994, § 18-405) 
Sec. 10-131. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1994, § 18-407) 
Sec. 10-132. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the city manager or designee any article pledged with him or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1994, § 18-408) 
Sec. 10-133. - Operation on Sundays. 
No pawnshop in the city shall be open, transact or conduct business on Sunday. 
(Code 1994, § 18-409) 
Sec. 10-134. - Maintenance of records. 
The records required by this article shall be kept and maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
(Code 1994, § 18-410) 
Sec. 10-135. - Hours of operation. 
The hours during which pawnbrokers may conduct business shall be from no earlier than 7:00 a.m. to no later than 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1994, § 18-411) 
Sec. 10-136. - Goods to be held for 15 days; weapons for 30 days. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods or pawns or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the term "goods" being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods taken in pawn or purchased for at least 15 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise, except for weapons, and firearms which will be held for at least 30 days. 
(Code 1994, § 18-412) 
Secs. 10-137—10-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-156. - Required. 
No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker, or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, until a business license has been obtained from the city manager or designee. Such license application shall be made to the city clerk and license issued only upon approval by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 18-401) 
Sec. 10-157. - Review of application. 
No action on any application for pawnbroker's license shall be taken until the city manager or designee has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the council for their consideration, approval or denial. There shall be an application fee in the amount established by the city for said background check. 
(Code 1994, § 18-402) 
Sec. 10-158. - Limitation on issuance. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person or persons who have been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property or moral turpitude. 
(Code 1994, § 18-403) 
Sec. 10-159. - Fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business within the city or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as a pawnbroker within the city shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 18-404) 
Secs. 10-160—10-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate taxicabs, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles accident insurance, O.C.G.A. § 33-34-1 et seq.; liability of owner of leased vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207; municipal authority to regulate traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; "proof of financial responsibility" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-2(5); insurance for person renting U-drive-it vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-102. 

Sec. 10-187. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Taxicabs, limousines and other passenger-carrying vehicles (hereinafter referred to as "passenger-carrying vehicles") means those vehicles for hire for the purpose of transporting passengers. 
(Code 1994, § 18-601) 
Sec. 10-188. - Cruising. 
No passenger solicitation shall be done by a taxicab, limousine or other passenger-carrying vehicle while cruising. The term "cruising" as used herein means moving about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. 
(Code 1994, § 18-602(3)) 
Sec. 10-189. - Parking; records of calls; receipts. 
No passenger-carrying vehicle shall be parked in the city except at its licensed terminus or such other places as may be designated for that purpose by the city manager or designee. Records shall be kept of all calls, and receipts shall be provided upon request of any passenger. 
(Code 1994, § 18-605) 
Sec. 10-190. - Vehicle markings; rates. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall have plainly printed on each side thereof the name of the licensed person, firm or corporation operating the vehicle and identification number not less than five inches in height. 
(b)  A schedule of rates and hours of operation shall be filed with the city manager by the licensee and posted in a place plainly visible to passengers within the vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 18-606) 
Secs. 10-191—10-218. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 10-219. - License required; expiration. 
(a)  No person or other entity shall conduct the business of operating a passenger-carrying vehicle in the city without having first applied for and obtained a license under the provisions of this article. All licenses shall expire December 31 of each year and are not transferable. 
(b)  Any person or other legal entity shall be deemed doing business in the city when operating a passenger-carrying vehicle from a fixed terminus located in the city or when soliciting passengers within the city who have not requested transportation by telephone or personal command. 
Sec. 10-220. - Fees; application. 
Applications for a passenger-carrying vehicle license may be obtained at the city hall. An application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the city. The application shall also be accompanied by a proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurance company approved by the state. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third persons against personal injury and property damage in amounts complying with state law. Such proof of insurance must evidence that all motor vehicles used for passenger conveyance operated by the applicant or licensee are insured as required by state law. Applicants and licensees shall register all vehicles operated with the city manager or designee and shall provide the department information as to the equipment actually in service. Licensed, registered vehicles may be exchanged or transferred with the approval of the department and the subsequent filing of a new or updated list of equipment in service. The city manager or designee will inspect all vehicles for hire annually to assure vehicles compliance to state safety requirements. 
(Code 1994, § 18-603) 
Sec. 10-221. - Permits required; restrictions; fees. 
(a)  No passenger-carrying vehicle license shall be issued before a permit application has been filed by the license applicant with the city manager or designee and the city manager or designee has completed a criminal background investigation of the applicant. In addition, all passenger-carrying vehicle drivers operating in the city must file a permit application with the city manager or designee and have a criminal background investigation completed before being issued an operator's permit. 
(b)  No license or permit shall be issued unless the applicant: 
(1)  Is at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Has not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five years prior to the date of application for the violation of any of the following criminal offenses. 
a.  Homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; 
b.  Criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; 
c.  Attempts to commit any of these listed offenses; 
d.  Any felony where a motor vehicle was used; 
e.  Any crime of violence or theft; 
f.  Any crime of possession, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs; or 
g.  Any crime of moral turpitude as defined by Georgia law. 
(c)  All permits issued through administrative error or an error in the completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  Any acts of perjury or misrepresentation on a license or permit application shall result in the denial of such application or the revocation of the license or permit. 
(e)  All operator permits expire December 31 of each year and are not transferable. All operators must post their permits in public view within the interiors of their vehicles. 
(f)  The schedule of permit fees as established by the city shall be posted in the offices of the city hall. 
(Code 1994, § 18-604; Ord. of 01-11-2018(1), § 1, 1-11-18) 
Sec. 10-222. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
A license or permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager where the applicant furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or permit, or omits information required in the application for a license or permit; or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article; or for conviction of any of the crimes set forth in section 10-221; or for any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 18-607) 
Secs. 10-223, 10-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 10-225. - Scope. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell items door to door, either at businesses or residences, or to sell to the public from a non-permanent location without a license as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 2, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-226. - Definitions and exceptions. 
(a)  Peddler. Any person who goes from place to place within the city, whether on foot, out of any mobile vehicle, or from any temporary location, carrying with him goods, wares, merchandise, foods, or other items of value which he exhibits, exposes for sale, vends or offers for sale to merchants or to customers shall be deemed a peddler; provided, however, a peddler shall not include: 
(1)  Any person who sells agricultural, forestry or farm products grown and sold on his farm, orchard, dairy, garden or similar facility; 
(2)  A traveling salesman representing a business located in the state, who is taking orders for future delivery; 
(3)  A person who is a retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in the city limits; 
(4)  Any person who conducts business at any authorized industry or association trade show; 
(5)  A person holding a garage, yard, rummage or similar sale when such person is a city resident or has a permanent place of business within the city and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person or when the net proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes; 
(6)  Newspaper carriers or bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods such as milk, bakery goods or flowers in the regular course of business; 
(7)  Any officer or employee of any city, county, state or federal government or of any subdivision thereof or of the school system who is on official business; or 
(8)  Any nonprofit organization such as scouts, civic clubs, veteran's organizations, school organizations when the membership of the club, troop or organization does the soliciting itself and the net proceeds of any such sales are to be used solely for charitable purposes, but this article shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor. Exempted nonprofit organizations shall have written permission from the property owner or his designee to sell at the temporary location. 
(b)  Nonprofit organization. No organization shall be considered a nonprofit organization within the meaning of this article except a tax-exempt organization within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law as such are now or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 3, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-227. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to solicit, canvass or make calls within a residential neighborhood except between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to solicit, canvass or make calls at any residence where the owner or any person residing within a residence has posted a sign reading "No Solicitors," or similar warning. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to leave immediately the premises of any person when requested to do so by such person. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person using a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the operation of its business to operate such vehicle upon the streets of the city and use a loudspeaker or other device to create noise or attract customers. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set up or display merchandise within any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 4, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-228. - Application for and issuance of peddlers license. 
(a)  Every peddler, as defined in the preceding section, shall be required to obtain a license as required by this article. 
(b)  Any person desiring to peddle any goods, wares, foodstuffs, or merchandise of any kind shall make petition to the mayor and council, describing the article to be peddled and the period for which the license is requested. 
(c)  Application for a peddler license shall be made on the forms provided by the city and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and permanent address of the applicant's registered agent for service of process; 
(3)  If a vehicle is to be used, a brief description of the vehicle, including the license number or other means of identification of such vehicle; 
(4)  A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days prior to the date of filing the application, which photograph shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear manner; 
(5)  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime and, if so, the nature of the offense and the penalty assessed for such offense; 
(6)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners within the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator designated by the city to properly evaluate the applicant's character and business responsibility; 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the current corporate officers, the registered office of the corporation, and a duly attested corporate resolution acknowledging the authority of the corporation to transact the type of business as set forth in the application; 
(8)  If the applicant is a corporation or form of business other than a sole proprietorship, the names and addresses of all employees who will engage in the occupation of peddler on behalf of the corporation. All information for the application for a license as enumerated in subsections (c)(3)—(6) of this section shall be provided for each such employee; 
(9)  A description of the article or articles to be peddled; 
(10)  The address of the proposed business location or a description of the area to be canvassed; and 
(11)  The period for which the license is requested. 
(d)  Regulatory fee. Application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable regulatory fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(e)  Location authorization. Applications for a peddler's license also shall contain written authorization for the use by the peddler of the designated premises. Peddlers may sell and display their goods, wares, foodstuffs, or merchandise only upon private property with the permission of the property owner upon compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(f)  Investigation. The petition shall be referred to the city official designated by the mayor, who shall investigate the same and promptly report his findings to the mayor and council, who in the exercise of due regard for the preservation of the public health, peace and good order, as well as the proper regulation of trade in the city, shall grant or refuse such application, and shall fix the period of the license in each particular case. 
(g)  Disapproval. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or required information is lacking, the mayor and council shall note disapproval on the application, as well as their reasons that no license will be issued. The investigator will forward the denial to the applicant. 
(h)  Approval. If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the mayor and council will endorse approval on the application and execute a license addressed to the applicant. Upon payment of the prescribed license fee, the investigator shall deliver the license to the applicant. The city manager or designee shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(i)  Transferability. No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be used at any time by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(j)  Expiration. All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 in the year when issued. Other licenses shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 5, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-229. - Requirement to carry license. 
Persons selling or peddling goods, foodstuffs, wares, or merchandise of any kind, shall be required to carry their licenses for such business with them. A peddler shall exhibit his license to the person solicited within 30 seconds after beginning his conversation with the potential customer. A peddler shall exhibit his license on the demand of an officer of the city having the right to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 6, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-230. - Peddling without a license. 
Any peddler offering goods, wares, foodstuffs, or merchandise for sale within the city, without license from the city, shall be subject to immediate arrest for the offense of "peddling without a license". 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 7, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 10-231. - Penalty. 
Any person who is found guilty of the offense of "peddling without a license" or any other provision of this article, on conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-225, § 8, 3-8-2012) 
Secs. 10-232—10-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Precincts. 
The area comprising the corporate limits of the city, as the same is now or shall hereafter exist, shall constitute the sole election precinct of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-302) 
Sec. 12-2. - Polling place. 
The polling place within the city shall be the Rock Gym located in the city and shall be open on election day from 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 2-303; Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 12-3. - Absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections, and such use shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380 et seq. 
(Code 1994, § 2-306) 
Sec. 12-4. - Vote required for election. 
Candidates for nomination for any public municipal office in any primary, and candidates for any public municipal office in any election shall be nominated or elected by a plurality of the votes cast to fill such nomination or public office. 
(Code 1994, § 2-307) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Environment and natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.) or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the city separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 14-26(b). 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state or United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. The term "pollutants" may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-112) 
Sec. 14-20. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. In the event a violation of this article constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city manager or designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city manager or designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice. Whenever the city manager or designee finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city manager or designee may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city manager or designee. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the municipal court shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or its designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the city manager or designee, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this subsection. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(1)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or designee shall deem appropriate, after the city manager or designee has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the city manager or designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(2)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city manager or designee may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in court to answer charges for such violation. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and the city manager or designee may seek cumulative remedies. 
(i)  Recovery of expenses. The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-117) 
Sec. 14-21. - Determinations. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the city separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Municipalities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  This article is adopted to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-100) 
Sec. 14-22. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-111.1) 
Sec. 14-23. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the incorporated area of city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-111.2) 
Sec. 14-24. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-111.3) 
Sec. 14-25. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city manager or designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-111.5) 
Sec. 14-26. - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under his control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city manager or designee as being necessary to protect public health on and safety; 
(3)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-113.1) 
Sec. 14-27. - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city manager or designee. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city manager or designee requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and, that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-113.2) 
Sec. 14-28. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city manager or designee prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-114) 
Sec. 14-29. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city manager or designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city manager or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city manager or designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city manager or designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city manager or designee may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city manager or designee. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city manager or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city manager or designee access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the city manager or designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city manager or designee is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, then the city manager or designee may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-115) 
Sec. 14-30. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Discovery. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Notification required; timeframe. Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours after such discovery of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city manager or designee within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  Notification time for hazardous materials. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Violation. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(2), § 22-116) 
Secs. 14-31—14-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL WASTE HANDLING 

Sec. 14-49. - Definitions and abbreviations. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial facilities means a facility constructed and intended to produce commercial, domestic, or industrial wastewaters, including facilities intended to collect, transport, and treat stormwater runoff. 
Commercial waste discharge permit means a wastewater discharge permit issued to commercial facilities by the local governing authority. 
Commercial waste transporter permit means a permit issued by a local governing authority for an individual tank truck. 
Commercial wastes means: 
(1)  Nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; 
(2)  Grease interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitation, fats, grease, and food scraps; or 
(3)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap. 
EPD means the state environmental protection division. 
FOG means fats, oils, and grease. 
FOG separator means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease interceptor means a structure or device designed to collect and retain oils, grease, and fatty substances usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. 
Grease trap means a FOG separator. 
Grit trap means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the Board of Natural Resources, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-11. 
LGA means local governing authority. 
Local governing authority means the city council or designee. 
Mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
Oil-water separator means a structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain oily substances. 
Originator means the owner or operator of the grease or FOG interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
Registered commercial waste transporter is a business/owner registered by the state environmental protection division and whose tank trucks are permitted by a local governing authority. 
Registration means acceptance by the state environmental protection division of a transporter. 
Sand trap means a receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
Septic wastes means the contents of a septic tank. 
Tank truck means any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
Transporter means any person or firm which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in this state. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § II) 
Sec. 14-50. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection and entry. 
(1)  Representatives of the LGA, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, or disposal site in this city at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article or the commercial waste transporter permit. 
(2)  Representatives of the city, during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, and the disposal site operator, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Monitoring. When required by the city, the originator shall install an approved manhole on the discharge sewer to allow observation, sampling and flow measurement. 
(c)  Violations. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this article, or any terms, conditions, schedule of compliance or other requirements contained in the respective permit, shall be subject to enforcement proceedings by the city pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the city manager or designee shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. 
(d)  Permit revocation. 
(1)  Any permit issued by the city manager or designee may be suspended, revoked or modified by the city, upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or other conditions outlined in this article. 
(2)  The permit may be reissued by the city manager or designee upon remedy of the noncompliance that caused the suspension, revocation or modification of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § V) 
Sec. 14-51. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
In the event a wastewater discharge is under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more constrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § VI) 
Sec. 14-52. - Purpose. 
(a)  Findings. Excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer system, causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation and vehicle maintenance facilities. 
(b)  Intent. This article sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system, and the transportation and ultimate disposal of commercial waste sludge and byproducts. The objective of this article is: 
(1)  To minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system; and 
(2)  To ensure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-6-.24 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § I) 
Sec. 14-53. - Coverage and exclusions. 
(a)  This article applies to any facility that generates commercial wastes, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial wastes for final disposal. 
(b)  This article applies only within the geographical and political boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § III) 
Sec. 14-54. - General requirements. 
(a)  Responsibility. It is the responsibility of the originator to ensure that the commercial waste removed from the originator's facility is properly treated and discharged to the sewer system, and that wastewater, sludge and byproducts are transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. The originator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste transporter permit issued by an LGA. 
(b)  Permitting process. There are two types of permits required under this article: commercial waste discharge permit (originator) and commercial waste transporter permit. The permits for the originator and transporter are issued by the LGA under this article. However, prior to obtaining a commercial waste transporter permit, the transporter must first register as a transporter of commercial waste with the EPD and obtain a transporter registration number. This registration number must be included in the permit number issued by the city. 
(c)  Manifest required. All originators, transporters, and processing and disposal site operators, involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multicopy form. An approved sample manifest is included in appendix A of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(1)  The originator shall: 
a.  Sign the received manifest form and maintain such record for a period of three years. 
b.  Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest, the transporter, must provide a copy of the manifest within ten days to the city manager or designee. A manifest is considered complete after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility, and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
c.  Keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three years on site and make it available for inspection by the city. 
d.  Report any spills to the city manager or designee upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city manager or designee of a spill will constitute a violation and fines may be assessed to the commercial waste originator as well as the transporter. 
(2)  The transporter shall: 
a.  Utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
b.  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
c.  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
d.  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within 30 days. 
e.  Keep one copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three years; except that the transporters manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding 30-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection. 
f.  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest form prescribed and furnished from time to time by the EPD. 
g.  Remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced and dispose of such contents, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes, only at a facility authorized to receive such waste. 
h.  Provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
(3)  A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste shall maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three years and make such records available for inspection. 
(d)  Limitations. No user shall introduce into the sewer system any materials in an amount which would cause interference with the system. In addition to any limitations set forth in the pretreatment provisions of chapter 34, pertaining to utilities, no user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewer system the following: 
(1)  Solid or viscous materials. Solid or viscous materials in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow to the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  Petroleum or mineral oils. Petroleum or mineral oils in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(3)  Trucked or hauled materials. Trucked or hauled materials, except at approved points that may be designated by the LGA as commercial waste disposal facilities. 
(4)  Fats, oils, and grease (FOG). FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
a.  Originator. 
1.  Food service establishment. 
(i)  Permit required. No food service establishment shall discharge commercial wastewater into the sanitary sewer system without a commercial waste discharge permit issued by the city. Application for such permit must be made on a form furnished by the city. The permit is valid for one year and is not transferable. 
(ii)  FOG separator required. All new restaurants, institutional kitchens, or other food service establishments defined as commercial users of the system, shall provide approved FOG and settleable solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The number and size of the system shall be determined by using the appropriate method as established in the chapter 34, article V, regarding FOG separator sizing, or by good engineering practices. Existing commercial users will be assessed on an individual basis, and will require approval of the city. 
(iii)  The separator shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and be accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. Manhole openings must be provided for inspection and cleaning purposes. 
(iv)  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
(v)  Alternative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval of the city. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall be used only after a case-by-case evaluation and authorization of the city. 
(vi)  The use of chemicals, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited, unless authorized by the city. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this article. 
(vii)  Maintenance required. All FOG separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All FOG separators shall be pumped out at a minimum of once every 90 days, or more frequently as required by the city, or as established in the commercial waste discharge permit. 
2.  Maintenance and service facilities. 
(i)  Permit required. No maintenance or service facility shall discharge commercial wastewater into the sanitary sewer system without a commercial waste discharge permit provided by the city. Application for such permit must be made on a form furnished by the city. 
(ii)  Sand/oil separator required. All maintenance or service facilities defined as commercial users of the system shall provide approved oil and solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this article. The type, number and size of the system shall be determined by current plumbing codes or good engineering practices. 
(iii)  The separator shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe for inspection purposes. A separate monitoring manhole may be required by the city. 
(iv)  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
(v)  Maintenance required. All separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All separators shall be pumped out at a minimum of once every three months, or more frequently as required by the city. 
b.  Transporter. 
1.  Registration required. Any transporter, owning or operating waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the city, must be registered with EPD. 
2.  Permit required. 
(i)  No transporter shall pump out or vacuum FOG separators, grit traps, sand traps, or oil-water separators without a valid commercial waste transporter permit issued by an LGA. 
(ii)  Application for the permit must be made on a form prescribed by the EPD. A copy of the transporter permit application is provided in appendix E of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(iii)  The transporter shall include the location of the disposal site on the commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(iv)  No commercial waste transporter permit shall be issued if the owner of the tank truck is not registered with the EPD. 
(v)  A commercial waste transporter permit shall be required for each individual tank truck owned and operated by a transporter. 
(vi)  The commercial waste transporter permit issued by the LGA for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
(vii)  A transporter, who has trucks permitted by an LGA, and who decides to have additional trucks permitted by another LGA, must provide copies of the current commercial waste transporter permits with the new commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(viii)  A transporter cannot have two tank trucks permitted with the same commercial waste transporter permit number. 
(ix)  This registration number shall be part of the commercial waste transporter permit number issued by the LGA. Every vehicle that transports commercial waste must display on the vehicle the FOG/permit number. 
3.  Transporter permit fees. A transporter permitting fee will be assessed on an annual basis at a rate established by the city. The fee shall be payable to the LGA. 
4.  Vehicle inspection. Annually the LGA shall inspect each tank truck prior to the issuance of a commercial waste transporter permit. Such inspection shall verify that the tank truck is substantially leakproof, durable, of easily cleaned construction, and is maintained in good repair. The LGA shall maintain records of each inspection. A copy of a sample vehicle inspection form is provided as appendix F of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(2), § IV) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes adopted herein by reference or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications of plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire services within the time set forth herein, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any person violating this chapter or any of the codes and/or laws incorporated herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a specified time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(c)  Upon written notice from the city manager or designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this chapter and the codes herein, or otherwise being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(d)  Permits or approvals may be revoked by the city manager or designee when there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any materials or facts contained in plans or other information on which the permit or approval has been based. 
(e)  Whenever the city manager or designee finds conditions which are unsafe and/or in violation of the provisions of this chapter, written notice, which has been approved by the city manager or designee, shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent, or the occupant or occupant's representative requiring that any activities impacted by such conditions shall cease until the condition is corrected. 
(Code 1994, § 6-119; Ord. of 4-11-2002(3), § 6-121) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1994, § 6-118; Ord. of 4-11-2002(3), § 6-120) 
Sec. 16-3. - Obstructing fire hydrants or connections. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire hydrant so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire department connection, closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
(Code 1994, §§ 3-704, 6-106; Ord. of 1-9-2003, § 3-705(9)) 
Sec. 16-4. - Obstructing a fire station. 
It is unlawful for any person to put any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any fire station or location where fire service equipment is located. 
(Code 1994, § 6-110) 
Sec. 16-5. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
(Code 1994, § 3-704; Ord. of 1-9-2003, § 3-705(10)) 
Sec. 16-6. - Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. 
No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1994, § 3-704; Ord. of 1-9-2003, § 3-705(11)) 
Sec. 16-7. - Tent permits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any terms not specifically defined herein shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
Air-inflated structure. A structure whose shape is maintained by air pressure in cells or tubes forming all or part of the enclosure of the usable area and in which the occupants are not within the pressurized area used to support the structure. 
Canopy. Any fixed roof-like structure that is self-supporting in whole or in part, but having no sidewalls or curtains other than valances not exceeding 18 inches in depth. 
Tent. A temporary structure, the covering of which is made of pliable material that achieves its support by mechanical means such as beams, columns, poles, arches, rope, and/or cables. Tents might also include a temporary tensioned-membrane structure. 
(b)  Permit. 
(1)  No person shall erect, operate or maintain a tent or air-inflated structure covering an area in excess of 200 square feet or a canopy in excess of 400 square feet without a permit issued by the City of Loganville's Fire Marshal's Office. 
(2)  Tents with a permit may be erected for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(3)  No more than four tent permits shall be permitted within a 12-month period for each property, and a period of at least two months shall be required between each permit period. Two sets of plans must be submitted for approval before installation followed by an inspection after the tent/canopy has been erected, and before it is occupied. Parking requirements (chapter 119 article VI of the City of Loganville Code) shall also be met for the principle use as well as the increased requirement resulting from the use of the permitted tent. 
(4)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, permits or regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2010(1), § 1) 
Sec. 16-8. - Tent and canopy installation. 
All tent and canopy installation shall conform to the standards of the most current International Fire Code safety requirements adopted by the city. The design, construction, maintenance and use of temporary tents shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and shall further comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Site plan. A site plan shall be provided to the city showing an unobstructed fire lane on all sides of the tent. The tent cannot block any fire hydrants or fire department connections. The site plan shall include the following: 
a.  A flame-resistant certificate by an acceptable testing laboratory. 
b.  A note on the submitted plan stating "NO SMOKING" signs will be posted. 
c.  A note on the submitted plans stating, "A ABC fire extinguisher will be provided and mounted no higher than 48" above finished floor to the handle." 
d.  A note on the submitted plan stating, "No smoking, no fireworks, no open flames or devices emitting an open flame or fire will be used in the tent/canopy." 
e.  Approved tent permit shall be attached to tent in plain view. 
(2)  Tent tarpaulins. Tent tarpaulins and all decorative materials shall be treated to render the materials flame-resistant for the period for which the permit is granted, in accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code. 
(3)  Structural supports. Tents shall be adequately guyed, supported and braced to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square foot of projected area. Tent poles shall be stayed with wire ropes; fiber rope shall be used only for mooring to stakes. 
(4)  Fire separation. No tent shall be erected nearer than ten feet to interior lot lines or to any building on the lot and shall not occupy more than 75 percent of the lot. 
(5)  Exit ways. Not less than 22 inches exit width shall be provided for each 500 square feet of public space enclosed, with a minimum width of exit way of 44 inches. When the occupancy load is more than 600, there shall be at least three exit ways and if more than 1,000 there shall be at least four exit ways. The line of travel to an exit way shall be not more than 150 feet. 
(6)  Aisles and passageways. There shall not be more than 11 seats between any seat and the nearest aisle. All exit way aisles and passageways shall be maintained free and unobstructed at all times during the occupancy of the tent. Aisles shall be not less than 24 inches in width when serving not more than 60 individuals, and not less than 36 inches in width when serving more than 60 individuals. When aisles are divided by a column or other obstruction, a minimum width of 22 inches shall be left on each side. 
(7)  Combustible materials. No hay, straw, shavings or similar combustible materials shall be allowed within the tent structure other than that necessary for the daily feeding and care of animals, and sawdust and shavings for use in performances when kept damp. No combustible materials shall be permitted under stands or seats at any time. 
(8)  Combustible trash. The area within and adjacent to tents shall be maintained clear of all grass and underbrush creating a fire hazard within a radius of 50 feet; and all combustible trash shall be removed from the enclosure at all performances. 
(9)  Exposed flames. No gasoline, gas, charcoal or other heating or cooking device or other exposed flame not connected with the performance or exhibit shall be allowed inside or within 20 feet of the tent enclosure. 
(10)  Spot lighting. Spot or effect lighting shall be by electricity only; and all combustible construction within six feet of such equipment shall be protected with flame-resistant materials not less than one-quarter inch thick or other approved noncombustible insulation. 
(11)  Fire protection. Portable fire extinguishing equipment and fire-fighting tools shall be provided, complying with the provisions of the fire prevention code, as directed by the fire marshal. When deemed necessary, the fire marshal may direct the organization of a fire bridage trained in the operation of fire extinguishing equipment and the emergency evacuating of the occupants. 
(12)  Fire watchers. One or more qualified persons to serve as fire watchers shall be employed by all circuses, carnivals or large exhibitions where such crowds assemble. They shall familiarize themselves with all fire protection facilities and fire prevention features and with the condition of exits and shall patrol the entire tent area during the time of occupancy. They shall see that aisles and exit ways remain open and that "No Smoking" rules are enforced (chapter 18 article III of the City of Loganville Code). 
(Ord. of 9-9-2010(1), § 1) 
Sec. 16-9. - Revocation of permit and appeals. 
(a)  Revocation of permit. The fire chief or his designee shall have the authority to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article if any information supplied by the applicant is discovered to be false or intentionally misleading; if any term, condition, restriction or limitation of the permit has been substantially violated; or if there is any continued violation of the terms, conditions, restrictions or limitations of the permit after the applicant or anyone acting in concert with him is notified of a violation of the permit. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the fire marshal or his designee to grant a permit or by the revocation of a permit after one has been issued, may appeal the denial or revocation by filing with the city manager's office, within five working days after the date of the denial or revocation, a written notice of the appeal setting forth the grounds therefore. The city manager shall act upon the appeal within five business days after its receipt by either affirming the decision of the fire marshal, overturning the decision of the fire marshal by granting the permit, or overturning the decision of the fire marshal by granting the permit with conditions. 
(2)  The decision of the fire marshal or the city manager or his designee, may be appealed to the Superior Court of Walton County pursuant to a writ of certiorari. 
(3)  The city shall meet all deadlines set by the court and by applicable statutes and court rules, and shall otherwise seek to assure that the appeal, including any motion for preliminary relief, is decided as expeditiously as possible. The city shall bear the burden of proof on any appeal under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2010(1), § 1) 
Sec. 16-10. - Violation of ordinance. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person found in violation of any provision of sections 16-7 through 16-9 shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Loganville Municipal Court and the provisions of article IV, section 4.13 of the City of Loganville Charter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2010(1), § 1) 
Secs. 16-11—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS AND CODES 

Sec. 16-31. - State rules adopted. 
There is adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion those certain codes as set forth by the state safety fire commissioner in chapter 120-3-3 of the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 120-3-3) in their entirety except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. There shall not be less man one copy of such codes filed in the office of the city manager or designee and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out completely herein. From the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996) 
Sec. 16-32. - Modifications. 
The fire chief, or his assistant, shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of this chapter and any codes enforced by the fire chief's office, upon written application of the owner or lessee of property, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The details of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision shall be entered upon the records of the inspection department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 6-103) 
Sec. 16-33. - Waivers. 
The fire chief, or his assistant, is authorized to grant exemptions from the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 30, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.) with regard to the access and use of facilities by persons with disabilities. The decision of the fire chief on such exemption may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Code 1994, § 6-104) 
Sec. 16-34. - Appeals. 
Any appeal or request for a variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the fire chief's office with the explanation and reasons for the variance. In response thereto, the fire chief's office shall furnish a statement as to the purpose of the requirement with its recommendations on the request to the public safety committee for disposition. 
(Code 1994, § 6-105) 
Sec. 16-35. - Issuance of approvals and certificate of occupancy; review fee. 
(a)  All commercial buildings and tenant spaces shall be required to obtain and post in a conspicuous place, a fire department certificate of occupancy from City of Loganville Fire Marshal's Office. 
(b)  All facilities shall submit for codes compliance review the construction plans for all work to be done. There shall be a plan review fee in the amount established by the city for each structure of tenant space covered by this section. There shall be a fee charge in the amount established by the city for the operating permit. All fees charged shall be paid by check and made payable to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-107; Ord. of 4-9-2015(1)) 
Sec. 16-36. - Temporary occupancy. 
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a facility. The fire chief's office shall forward written comments to the building official of the city allowing or disallowing occupancy of a partially completed facility. 
(Code 1994, § 6-108) 
Sec. 16-37. - Outdoor and open burning. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department or his appointed representative may prohibit any and all fires when prescribed rules, regulations and laws are not followed or circumstances make such fires and smoke hazardous to life, health or property as described in section 16-89. 
(b)  The fire chief's office shall notify the state of state environmental protection division, in writing, of any violations to this section within seven days of the occurrence. 
(Code 1994, § 6-109) 
Sec. 16-38. - Response to malfunctioning fire alarms. 
When emergency response to a tenant's malfunctioning fire alarm system exceeds two in a 30-day period, a fee in the amount established by the city shall be charged for each additional incident. Fees shall be payable, by check, to the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-111) 
Sec. 16-39. - Fire-extinguishing equipment in public facilities. 
(a)  Approved fire-extinguishing equipment shall be installed in restaurants or other public food facilities having cooking appliances such as ranges, deep fat frying, grill or broilers. 
(b)  The standards for approval of such facilities shall be based on NFPA No. 96 or an equivalent measure deemed acceptable to the fire chief or assistant fire chief. 
(Code 1994, § 6-112) 
Sec. 16-40. - Portable buildings. 
(a)  All portable buildings open to the public shall provide adequate measures to prevent the superstructure from sliding, uplifting, rotating and overturning. 
(b)  Such portable buildings shall be provided with anchors and tiedowns such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men" eyelets embedded in concrete slabs, runways, screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices to be use to stabilize the portable building. 
(c)  Anchors and tiedowns shall be placed at each corner of the portable building and shall be able to sustain a minimum load of 4,800 pounds. 
(Code 1994, § 6-114) 
Sec. 16-41. - Designated fire lanes. 
(a)  Streets or drives adjacent to the following locations shall have designated fire lanes: 
(1)  Any building 22,500 square feet or more with storage facilities, except for storage warehouse occupancies which are equal to or greater than 80 percent of the total building area and which comply with subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Places of assembly with occupant load of 300 or more; 
(3)  The area five feet on each side of the fire hydrants and associated appliances used for fire protection; 
(4)  All points of exit from nursing homes, hospitals, multi-storied office buildings, and places of assembly. 
(b)  Buildings not required to have fire lanes shall maintain fire service access to at least one side. 
(c)  Where designated fire lanes are required, they shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The curbing shall be painted "traffic red." Where curbing is not present, there shall be a 20-foot wide, cross-hatched, traffic red way of access free of obstructions in areas designated by the fire chief or his representative; or 
(2)  Signs meeting the specifications described in this chapter shall be spaced no less than 30 feet apart and legible from both directions of travel. 
Any person obstructing a fire lane, or red curb, or handicap parking space shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Building driveways shall be kept clean of any obstruction which would hinder access by fire services equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 6-115; Ord. of 4-9-2015(2)) 
Sec. 16-42. - Unlawful ignition of combustible materials. 
Any persons smoking or attempting to light or smoke a cigarette, cigar, pipe, or tobacco in any form for which lighters, matches, flammable liquids or chemicals are used, and who sets fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes, house or household furnishings, in any hotel roominghouse or multifamily house, as a result of said smoking or attempting to smoke, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 6-116) 
Sec. 16-43. - Reporting of fires. 
Any damage by fire having a total dollar value of $200.00 or more shall be reported to the fire prevention section within 24 hours. 
(Code 1994, § 6-117) 
Sec. 16-44. - Hazardous substance and hazardous waste. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the words and phrases defined in this subsection shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. Where terms are not defined herein, ordinarily accepted meanings within the proper context shall apply. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous wastes into or on any land, atmosphere, or water so that such substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waterway or water, including groundwater. 
Hazardous substance means a substance which exhibits any one of the following characteristics: 
(1)  A substance, which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties, which it exhibits, is determined by the chief of the fire department or his designees to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety or to the environment as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure or contamination. 
(2)  A substance which is known by the employer to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness in the workplace in the city as the result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure or contamination. This subsection of this definition shall not be construed as requiring any employer to compile or generate new data. 
(3)  A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property. 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste which in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which is in force and effective February 1, 1986, codified as 40 CFR 261, identification and listing of hazardous waste. 
Hazardous waste generation means the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
Substance means any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
(b)  Any person responsible for the generation, storage transportation, disposal, or use of hazardous substances and/or hazardous waste that is discharged within the city shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the city during the mitigation of such incidents. 
(c)  A fee in the amount established by the city, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, shall be assessed against any person responsible for the generation, storage transportation, disposal, or use of hazardous substances and/or hazardous waste if such are discharged within the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2002(3), § 6-119) 
Secs. 16-45—16-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-13-2016(1), §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 13, 2016, reserved Art. III, which pertained to sprinklers and fire detection systems and derived from Ord. of 5-17-2006, §§ A—F. 

Secs. 16-62—16-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 16-89. - Regulations. 
(a)  Generally. Except as hereinafter provided in subsections (b) through (d) of this section, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the person responsible for same upon notice by the fire chief or his duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Pit fires. 
(1)  The only type of fires permitted for the purpose of land clearing are pit fires. Non-pit fires are not permitted for land clearing in the city. All pit fires shall be conducted in strict accordance with the Air Curtain Destructor Operating Guide and Procedures as published by the North Georgia Region of the State Environmental Protection Division. 
(2)  Pit fires shall comply with the following stipulations: 
a.  The pit shall be at least 300 feet from any occupied or habitable structure. This distance may be increased if need is assessed by the fire chief's office and validity exists. 
b.  Where a site cannot be excavated to the recommended depth due to high water table and/or subsurface rock, the pit may be constructed above ground level, subject to the same state standards and procedures for a pit below ground level. 
c.  Only wood wastes consisting of trees, logs, large brush, stumps, leaves, and untreated lumber may be burned in the pit. 
d.  Leaves, sawdust or other densely packed wood wastes, paper (any type), chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood, or non-wood construction materials shall not be burned. The amount of dirt/soil mixture shall be kept to a minimum. 
e.  No more than one air curtain destructor is allowed to be operated within a ten-acre permitted site at one time. The air curtain destructor must be under the supervision of a trained operator at all times during operation. In the event there is a need for multiple burning pits there shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet between each burning pit. 
f.  Air curtain destructors shall be able to pass an even, nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit. Air curtain destructors with an air duct or manifold that has been altered by bends, dents, holes, etc., and are incapable of providing an even and nonturbulent flow of air across the top of the pit shall not be approved for use. 
g.  The air curtain destructor shall be operated in a manner to prevent air, land or water pollution, safety/health hazards, or nuisances. 
h.  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils, or asphaltic base or impregnated materials shall not be used to start or maintain air curtain destructor operations. 
i.  No smoke emissions exceeding 40 percent opacity may be produced during operation except for a reasonable period during ignition and charging of the pit. 
j.  When the pit is cleared of ash, airborne particulate is to be minimized by wetting or mixing the ashes with dirt. 
k.  Diesel fuel or kerosene may be used to start pit fires. 
(c)  Permits and fees. 
(1)  Permits for open burning at or on development sites for the purpose of clearing land for new construction shall be obtained from the city fire department. Permits shall be registered with the city emergency dispatch by the fire chief's office. 
a.  The applicant shall complete an application for an open burning permit issued by the fire chief's office. The applicant shall submit a plat or site plan showing the proposed location of the pit and information relating to the proximity of any occupied or unoccupied structure. 
b.  The application, if approved, shall be accompanied by a check for $250.00 made payable to the city. 
c.  No burning shall commence prior to an inspection of the site and the pit by a representative of the city fire department. Upon approval of the pit, the permit shall be valid for a period of 30 days. Permits may be extended for increments of 15-day periods without additional fees, for a maximum of two extensions. 
(2)  Any citizen of the city wishing to conduct open burning must contact the city fire department for a burning permit. Individual permits are issued only on the day of intended burning and are valid for that day only. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued unless the issuing officer is satisfied that: 
a.  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
b.  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
c.  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; and 
d.  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection thereof. 
(4)  Any permit issued may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
a.  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
b.  Protect property and the health, safety and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning. 
(5)  If it becomes apparent at any time to the fire chief that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in subsections (c)(3) and (4) of this section, the fire chief or his duly designated agent shall notify the permittee in writing and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(d)  Burning restrictions. 
(1)  The fire chief's office may temporarily prohibit any and/or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such a fire hazardous. 
(2)  No burning is permitted on Sundays or at night. Burning at construction sites for the clearing of land for new development shall not be conducted before or after daylight hours. 
(3)  No burning is permitted when prevailing winds are in excess of 15 mph in the direction of populated areas immediately adjacent to the permitted site. 
(4)  No burning is permitted during an air pollution episode, such as an air pollution alert/warning/emergency declared by proper authorities. 
(5)  No burning is permitted when there are fog, rain, or cloud bases that are diffused, or ill defined, or for at least one day following the passage of a cold front. 
(6)  No burning of solid waste, household garbage, dead animals, or animal waste is allowed. 
(7)  No burning of any materials that emit a heavy dark smoke, such as rubber products, oils, roofing materials, petroleum based products, etc. 
(8)  No burning when smoke presents a health hazard to persons in the vicinity of the fire. 
(9)  No burning shall be conducted within 20 feet of flammable, combustible or explosive materials unless otherwise specified by state standards. 
(10)  Burning of leaves, limbs, etc., that fall on a person's own property can only be conducted during daylight hours and only in those areas where provision for public collection of leaves is not made. 
(11)  Prior notification shall be given to the state forestry commission before any agricultural burning is conducted. The term "agricultural" refers to land zoned R 44 as defined in chapter. 
(12)  All fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished. 
(13)  There shall be a garden hose connected to a water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(14)  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
a.  For the prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
b.  For the instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief; or 
c.  For the protection of public health. 
(15)  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(16)  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(17)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(Code 1994, § 9-102) 
Sec. 16-90. - Summary abatement. 
The chief of the city fire department, or his designee, shall have the authority to summarily abate any conditions which are in violation of any of the provisions of this article, and which may constitute an immediate threat to life and property. In no event shall a pit fire or other open burning continue after the fire department has revoked said permit. 
(Code 1994, § 9-103) 
Secs. 16-91—16-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM 

Sec. 16-116. - Intent. 
(a)  The City of Loganville recognized the importance of providing the fire department rapid entry into locked buildings. The delay in gaining entry can result in substantial property damage, the potential for rapid fire erosion and increased danger for the fire fighters. To assist the fire department in gaining rapid entry, the City of Loganville adopts a rapid entry system ordinance. 
(b)  Let it be known that in accordance with International Fire Code 506.1, a fire department can require a business to have a key box on-premises as well as provide a fire department master key to authorized personnel of the fire department. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-117. - Applicability. 
The following sections apply to all buildings within the City of Loganville, exclusive of buildings within the city limits of Loganville, that: 
(1)  Are used for public buildings, restricted business, industrial, commercial or limited commercial use and: 
a.  Contain a sprinkler system; or 
b.  Contain a fire alarm system; or 
c.  Contain an automatic fire suppression system; or 
d.  Is a facility that is required to prepare and have available material safety data sheets and/or hazardous chemical inventory forms under the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA Title III). 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-118. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
Automatic fire suppression system. A system or assembly of piping, valves, controls and sprinklers which are designed and installed to comply with the NFPA standards, which utilize water, foam, C02, or other gas to automatically react to suppress fires. 
Central station. An office of a private company to which a remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals. 
Fire alarm system. Equipment which automatically actuates a fire alarm when the detecting element is exposed to fire, smoke, abnormal rise or decrease in temperature or activation of a sprinkler system or manually activated device. 
Fire department master key. A limited issue key of special or controlled design to be carried by fire department officials in command which will open key boxes on specified properties. 
Lock box/key box. A high security key vault which is listed under the UL 1610 and the UL 1037 standards, master keyed with a Medeco Biaxial Level 7 or equivalent lock. Locks shall be keyed to the key configuration provided by the fire department. 
Lock box document vault. A high security steel plate vault with a minimum of 14 inches high by 12 inches wide by 2 inches deep, constructed to the same standards as the lock box, for the storage of documents. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-119. - Installation requirements. 
(a)  The Loganville Fire Department has chosen the Knox Company to serve as our supplier. All key boxes purchased for use in the City of Loganville must come from this company. 
(b)  The owner of applicable buildings, as described in section 16-117 above, shall install or cause to be installed a lock box system and/or lock box document vault prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any portion of the building for new or remodeling construction or within six months of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article derives if no new construction or remodeling takes place. 
(c)  The lock box shall be installed on the front of the building near the main entry door and between six and eight feet above the ground unless approved at a higher or lower level by the City of Loganville Fire Department. 
(d)  The lock box shall contain the key(s) for the exterior doors, the keys for all interior doors within the building and a scaled floor plan of the building. In lieu of having the interior keys at this location, a second lock box may be located within the main lobby of the building to hold these keys. Keys within the lock box shall be labeled for easy identification either by the tenant name or indexed floor plan of the building and shall be kept current. 
(e)  Where a building contains a business that is required to maintain material safety data sheets, a lock box document vault shall be installed. The lock box document vault shall be installed on the front of the building, near the main entry door and between six and eight feet from the ground unless approved at a higher or lower level by the City of Loganville Fire Department. The vault shall contain copies of the material safety data sheets that are required to be on file within the building as well as a floor plan or written description that indicates the location of the general areas of these materials will be found within the building. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-120. - Penalties of offenses. 
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable pursuant to enforcement procedures set forth by the City of Loganville Fire Department. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Sec. 16-121. - Amendment of provisions. 
The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the city ordinance and the general municipal law applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2007) 
Secs. 16-122—16-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VECTOR CONTROL 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business building means any structure, permanent or temporary, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, roominghouses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
Enforcement authority means the city council. 
Enforcement officer means the city manager or designee. 
Nuisance means whatever is detrimental to human health or whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome. 
Occupant means the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any buildings or a part thereof whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any portion of a building or premises, the owner, agent, or other person having custody of the building or premises shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of the building or premises. 
Owner means the actual owner of a building whether an individual, partnership or corporation, who owns or holds title to a building and includes also the agents for the building or other person having custody or managerial control. In the case of business buildings leased or rented with a clause in the contract specifying that the lessee or tenant is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee or tenant will be considered the owner. 
Rat control means any method as may be approved by the enforcement authority to control the rat population. 
Rat harborage means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrance of rats into any business building. 
Ratproofing means a form of building construction which will prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings through the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalks openings, foundations and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing, or otherwise. The material to be used for ratproofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement, concrete mortar, sheet metal, and minimum 18-gauge wire cloth having a mesh not larger than one-half inch. All material for ratproofing shall be such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat-gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated into a metal frame conforming to the materials prescribed in this definition. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills and jambs not exceeding three-eighths of an inch. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2001(3)) 
Sec. 18-20. - Enforcement and violations. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the board of health and/or the city manager or designee. 
(b)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this article on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2001(3)) 
Sec. 18-21. - Prohibitions and requirements. 
(a)  Nuisances. No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance. Nuisances include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Conditions conducive to the breeding of flies or mosquitoes. 
(2)  Trash, garbage, refuse, or any foul, decaying, or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable or detrimental to health or well being. 
(3)  Except in areas deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority, the keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals shall be prohibited. Any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well drained, free form accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the enforcement authority. 
(b)  Ratproofing. 
(1)  The owners of all business buildings shall have such buildings ratproofed, and kept ratproofed in accordance with this article. 
(2)  All business buildings hereafter erected, enlarged or repaired, shall be ratproofed and kept ratproofed in accordance with this article. 
(3)  Whenever conditions inside or under any such business buildings or on any premises provide harborage for rats such that the enforcement authority deems it necessary that the harborage be eliminated, the owner shall take steps toward the elimination of the harborage. 
(c)  The occupants in charge of any business building or premises shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Store all garbage in a ratproof and insectproof metal container or a type approved by the enforcement authority, pending removal of such garbage. 
(2)  Keep such buildings and/or premises free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage for rats. 
(3)  Maintain such buildings and/or premises in a ratfree condition by pursuing a program of rat control approved by the enforcement authority. 
(d)  Owners and occupants of any dwelling shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit and those parts that he occupies and controls shall be maintained in a condition not conductive to rat infestation. 
(3)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all rubbish in a clean, sanitary manner. 
(4)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall store and dispose of all garbage, refuse, and any other organic waste which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary, safe manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be ratproof; insectproof; watertight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress, easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tightfitting covers or similar closures; and shall be maintained at all times in a clean sanitary condition. Plastic bags may be used as garbage refuse container liners, but shall not be used without the container for on-site storage of garbage or refuse. Other types of containers meeting requirements of this regulation may be specifically approved by the enforcement authority. 
(5)  The total capacity of all provided garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling. 
(6)  Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case of a single- or two-family dwelling it shall be the responsibility of each occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers. 
(7)  Every owner of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of rats on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever the dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(8)  No occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about any dwelling or dwelling unit. Stored materials shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(9)  No owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials in such a manner that may provide a rat harborage in or about the shared or public areas of a dwelling or its premises. Materials stored by the owner shall be stacked neatly at least 18 inches above the ground. 
(10)  No owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall store, place, or allow to accumulate any materials which may serve as food for rats in a site accessible to rats. 
(11)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep the supplied fixtures and facilities therein in a clean, sanitary and operable condition and shall be responsible for the proper use and operation thereof. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or other person to remove the ratproofing from any building for any purpose and fail to restore same in satisfactory condition, or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2001(3)) 
Secs. 18-22—18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SMOKE-FREE AIR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoking prohibitions, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.; local smoking ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-12. 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attached bar means a bar area of a restaurant. 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for nonprofit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all spaces between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight-control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private function means a gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberation, education, instruction, entertainment, amusement, or dining, where membership or specific invitation is a prerequisite to entry and where the event is not intended to be open to the public. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports malls, sports arenas, theaters, meeting halls where events and public activities are held, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a children's or adult day care or a health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include an attached bar. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1002) 
Sec. 18-47. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Each day on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1012) 
Sec. 18-48. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  The city does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 2000 (Monograph No. 10) that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of 65,000 Americans annually. 
(2)  The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen (U.S. DHHS, 2000, citing Cal. EPA, 1997). 
(3)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(4)  The Americans with Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. 
(5)  The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke. The Environmental Protection Agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are only capable of filtering the particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand smoke. 
(6)  A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25 to 50 percent higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. 
(7)  Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke. 
(8)  Numerous economic analyses examining restaurant and hotel receipts and controlling for economic variables have shown either no difference or a positive economic impact after enactment of laws requiring workplaces to be smoke free. Creation of smoke-free workplaces is sound economic policy and provides the maximum level of employee health and safety. 
(9)  Smoking is a potential cause of fires; and cigarette and cigar burns, and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures cause economic damage to businesses. 
(b)  Accordingly the council finds and declares that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1001) 
Sec. 18-49. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord of 4-10-2003, § 1015) 
Sec. 18-50. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the code enforcement officers, law enforcement officers, or authorized designee of the city manager. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the code enforcement officer or the city manager or his authorized designee. 
(d)  The code enforcement office, fire department, or their designee shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city manager, code enforcement officer, or other person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1011) 
Sec. 18-51. - Public education. 
The city manager, or his authorized designee and/or the code enforcement officer shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1013) 
Sec. 18-52. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager, or his authorized designee and/or the code enforcement officer shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, and county school district agencies to update their smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1014) 
Sec. 18-53. - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities, including building and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1003) 
Sec. 18-54. - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels. 
(3)  Bingo facilities when a bingo game is in progress. 
(4)  Convention facilities. 
(5)  Elevators. 
(6)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar facilities. 
(7)  Health care facilities. 
(8)  Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities. 
(9)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartments buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(10)  Polling places. 
(11)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the city, and ticketing, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(12)  Restaurants, including attached bars. 
(13)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common use areas. 
(14)  Retail stores. 
(15)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city. 
(16)  Service lines. 
(17)  Shopping malls. 
(18)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1004) 
Sec. 18-55. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1005) 
Sec. 18-56. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of five feet outside an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1006) 
Sec. 18-57. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 18-54 and 18-55: 
(1)  Bars other than attached bars. 
(2)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 25 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms when these places are being used for private functions, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted. 
(7)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of section 18-56. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1007) 
Sec. 18-58. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 18-59(a) is posted. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1008) 
Sec. 18-59. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1009) 
Sec. 18-60. - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003, § 1010) 
Secs. 18-61—18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 12, 2012, repealed art. IV, §§ 18-86—18-119 entitled "Body Art Studios and Artists", which derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 12, 2010. 

Secs. 18-86—18-145. - Reserved. 
Chapter 19 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1—19-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOGANVILLE OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 19-51. - Establishment of office. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Loganville in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-52. - Qualifications. 
Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Loganville shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-53. - Oath. 
The prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Loganville shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
 "I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Loganville." 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-54. - Term of office. 
Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Loganville, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one year. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-55. - Jurisdiction, duties and authority. 
The office of prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Loganville shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-56. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-57. - Substitute prosecuting attorney. 
As provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-18-95, if the prosecuting attorney of the Loganville Municipal Court is disqualified from engaging in the prosecution of a particular case or is unable to perform the duties of said office due to illness or incapacity, the governing authority shall provide for the appointment of a substitute prosecuting attorney. At any time in which a substitute prosecuting attorney is not available or an appointment has not been made, the Loganville City Attorney may serve as the substitute prosecuting attorney until such time as a prosecuting attorney or substitute prosecuting attorney is available or appointed. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-58. - Ratification. 
This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and his council. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Sec. 19-59. - Notification. 
It shall be the duty of the municipal court clerk, or such other person designated by the governing authority of the city, to notify the Prosecuting Attorney's Council of the State of Georgia of the name of any person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of a municipal court within 30 days of such appointment. 
(Ord. of 7-12-2012, § 4) 
Secs. 19-60—19-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 20 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; unsafe building ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.) as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety codes as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by the city provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Code enforcement officer means the officer duly appointed by the governing authority of the city to enforce the ordinances of the city and who is authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Drug crime means an act that is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council. 
Owner means the holder of the title to property in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of such property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the city for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the city council as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other regulations concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or city. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-101) 
Sec. 20-20. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to try issues concerning the existence and abatement of public nuisances within the geographical limits of the city in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 41, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-102) 
Sec. 20-21. - Determination of power conferred. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  Hazards to health, safety and welfare. It is found and declared that in the city there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city, or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(2)  Detrimental effect on adjacent real estate. It is found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(b)  Power to repair, close or demolish structure. Whenever the code enforcement officer finds that there exist dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, power is conferred upon the city to exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this article. 
(c)  Applicable to private property. All the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector that such property is a health or safe hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-103) 
Sec. 20-22. - Prohibition and abatement. 
(a)  Conformance with codes required; declaration as nuisance. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction of the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  Designation of authority. The code enforcement officer is designated and appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Investigations and inspections; complaint issued, served with summons. Whenever a request is filed with the code enforcement officer by any public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the code enforcement officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the code enforcement officer's investigation or inspection identifies any of the above, then he may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(d)  Contents of complaint. The complaint shall: 
(1)  Identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; 
(2)  Identify the owner and parties in interest; 
(3)  State with particularity the factual basis for the action; and 
(4)  Contain a statement of the action sought by the code enforcement officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(e)  Contents of summons; time frame; right to respond. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court for the city at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days or more than 45 days after the filing of such complaint in the municipal court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)  Findings by court; orders. If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order showing the following: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(g)  Failure to comply. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the code enforcement officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The code enforcement officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful. 
(h)  Sale of salvaged materials. If the code enforcement officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The code enforcement officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 20-23. - Establishment of lien. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  The lien provided for in this article shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this article. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b), the clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the code enforcement officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the tax commissioner for the county in which the subject property is located. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  The county tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by this article unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county governing authority. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(d)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(e)  A review of the court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-105) 
State Law reference— Liens, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 20-24. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the code enforcement officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the manner described in this section. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the code enforcement officer to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city and a return of service filed with the clerk of the municipal court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4, art. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.); or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside the county in which the subject property is located, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents of the state whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest in the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and such cannot be ascertained by the code enforcement officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the code enforcement officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided by this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county in which the dwelling or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided for by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to the service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-12. 
Sec. 20-25. - Standards for determination of nuisances. 
(a)  A finding of noncompliance with any building, fire, health, sanitation, or life safety code, regulation or ordinance adopted by the city council shall constitute prima facie evidence that a public nuisance exists. 
(b)  In addition to specified code violations without limiting the generality of subsection (a) of this section, the following conditions are subject to abatement: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, including improper storage of materials on the premises; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation and disrepair, including those structures which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes such that the external structure and roof have been destroyed or structural members weakened; sanitation and general unseemliness, including improper keeping of pets and animals on the premises, and improper disposal of human and animal waste; 
(4)  Accumulation of trash, weeds having a height of 12 inches or more, debris, junk, filth, standing or stagnant water, and other unsafe conditions; and 
(5)  Vacant, unsecured dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2008, § 19-107) 
ARTICLE III. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 

Sec. 20-26. - Purpose. 
(a)  The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
(b)  In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this city council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
(c)  In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  "Blighted property", "blighted", or "blight" means any urbanized or developed property which: 
a.  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
1.  Uninhabitable, unsafe or abandoned structure; 
2.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air or sanitation; 
3.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this article shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
4.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
5.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
6.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
b.  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
(2)  "Building inspector" means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  "Community redevelopment" means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(4)  "Governing authority" means the City Council of the City of Loganville, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
(5)  "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(6)  "Person" means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
(7)  "Public officer" means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-28. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-29. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance; or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above, shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by an inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of the county in which the property is located as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the exercise of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, the public officer shall make a reasonable effort to provide written notice to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from service of the notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer will notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the designated legal organ in the county in which the property is located, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, in the discretion of the judge. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer will have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of the county in which the property is located, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the superior court of the county in which the property is located for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the municipal court's written determination. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-30. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Payment of any and all outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax imposed pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property; and 
(2)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; and 
(3)  Completion of any work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article II, Nuisance Abatement, of chapter 20 of the Code of the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
(b)  Before taking action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of the county in which the property is located. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal state-wide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; and 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-31. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 20-29, Identification of blighted property, of this article, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 20-32. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the tax commissioner of the county in which the property is located as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the applicable county tax assessor's office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2015, § 1) 
Secs. 20-33—20-55. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Criminal trespass. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10.1, the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21 are adopted and incorporated by reference as the ordinance of the city governing criminal trespass and hereby made a part of this Code for all offenses which occur within Walton County. To the extent allowed by state law, the court is further authorized to probate, suspend, or defer any sentence imposed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2008, § 4(16-114)) 
Secs. 22-2—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 22-19. - Discharging firearms, air guns, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm or to discharge at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1994, § 16-102) 
Sec. 22-20. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are required to report to the police department of the city all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 1994, § 16-103) 
Sec. 22-21. - Throwing of missiles. 
It is unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1994, § 16-104) 
Sec. 22-22. - Knives. 
It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession except within his own domicile, any of the following implements unless the same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches; 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close; 
(4)  Any razor; or 
(5)  Any icepick or similar device having a sharp point, except that this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1994, § 16-111) 
Secs. 22-23—22-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 22-48. - Noise regulation. 
(a)  Noise at certain hours. It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(1)  Noise in certain location. It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in the Main Street District (see Main Street District map [at the end of this section]). 
(b)  Prohibited types of noise. The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and unreasonable noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning, the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The playing, using, or operating of or the permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The playing, using, or operating of or the permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel, or other type residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor boat, automobile, truck, bus, motorcycle, or other vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Piledrivers, hammers, similar equipment. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steamshovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noises. 
(8)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 

(Code 1994, §§ 10-101, 10-102; Ord. of 2-14-2002; Ord. of 03-18-2018(1), § 1, 3-8-18) 
Sec. 22-49. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to: 
(1)  Attempt to commit a violent injury to the person of another. 
(2)  Commit an act which places another in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
(3)  Intentionally make physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with the person of another. 
(4)  Intentionally cause physical harm to another. 
(5)  Intentionally damage any property of another without consent. 
(6)  Without provocation, use to another person or in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which, as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to another person or in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words." 
(7)  Without provocation, use obscene and vulgar or profane language in a public gathering, school or school function, athletic or sporting event, public meeting, publicly owned or operated building, or in the presence of a person under the age of 14 years. 
(8)  Cause bodily harm to or endanger the bodily safety of another by consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustified risk that the act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of the other person and the disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(9)  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or oppose an employee of the state or any political subdivision thereof, including, but not limited to, the city, in the lawful discharge of the employee's official duties. 
(10)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or oppose an emergency medical technician, nurse, or doctor in the lawful discharge of their official duties. This section, however, does not abridge a citizen's right to legally refuse medical treatment. 
(11)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to significantly impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear such public way when requested by a law enforcement officer or other city employee. 
(12)  While in a gathering, refuse to obey the reasonable official request or order of a peace officer, firefighter, or emergency medical technician to move for the purpose of promoting the public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, accident, emergency, or violent situation. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of disorderly conduct shall be punished in accordance with article V, section 5.13 of the City of Loganville Charter. 
(Code 1994, § 16-101; Ord. of 10-9-2008, § 1(16-101); Ord. of 07-13-2017(1), § 1, 7-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 07-13-2017(1), § 2, adopted July 13, 2017, states "this amendment is intended to apply retroactively to the date of original enactment of chapter 22, section 22-49." 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 22-50. - Ball playing. 
It is unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 16-105) 
Sec. 22-51. - Bonfires. 
It is unlawful for any person, during a holiday or at any other time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 16-106) 
Sec. 22-52. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b),(c), and (d) herein, it shall be unlawful for any establishment licensed for the retail sale of alcohol to dispense any alcoholic beverage in an open container for removal from the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any such establishment any open container of alcoholic beverage or to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container or to possess in any open container any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, public parks, public buildings, and parking lots, whether public or private, within the corporate limits of the City of Loganville. 
(b)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages within the confines of the Town Green and in the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center is subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  An establishment licensed for the retail sale of malt beverages and wine on the premises that applies for and receives a special event permit under section 4-71.1 of the Loganville Code of Ordinances may dispense alcoholic beverages in accordance with the special event permit. 
(2)  Consumption of an alcoholic beverage in an open container within the confines of the Town Green and the Historic Rock Gym Convention Center shall not constitute a violation of this Code section. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages consumed within the confines of the Town Green must be in a plastic container. No glass or cans are allowed. 
(c)  Consumption on the premises in approved temporary outdoor areas contiguous and connected to the retail location for which a retail consumption license has been issued shall not constitute a violation of this Code section when such consumption is in compliance with a special event permit issued in accordance with section 4-71.1 of the Loganville Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  [Main Street District] . 
(1)  Consumption of an alcoholic beverage in an open container within the confines of the Main Street District, as defined by the attached Main Street District Map, shall not constitute a violation of this Code section. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages consumed within the confines of the Main Street District must be in a plastic or aluminum container. 
(Code 1994, § 16-107; Ord. of 10-6-2014(2), § 1; Ord. of 03-08-2018(1), § 1, 3-8-18) 
Sec. 22-53. - Loitering. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and shall include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the city on private or public property in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; 
(5)  Be at a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances which would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity; or 
(6)  Be at a place in which the owner or lawful occupant of said premises has posted a "no loitering" sign and when such signs are clearly visible. 
(b)  Relocating from one position to another and regrouping or generally hanging around shall be prima facie evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under these provisions. 
(Ord. of 10-9-2008, § 3(16-113)) 
Secs. 22-54—22-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-78—22-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEXUAL OFFENDERS AND SEXUAL PREDATORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Sex offenders generally, O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 et seq. 

Sec. 22-98. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2006(2), § 16-202) 
Sec. 22-99. - Findings and intent. 
(a)  Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residence. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2006(2), § 16-201) 
Sec. 22-100. - Residence prohibition; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any person who is required to register as provided in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to nearest outer property line of a school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(c)  Penalties. A person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of this section, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the county jail not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  Exceptions. A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 and had an ownership or leasehold interest in the property, all prior to August 1, 2006. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The school, designated public school bus stop or day care center within 2,500 feet of the person's permanent residence was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2006(2), § 16-203) 
Sec. 22-101. - Property rental to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to section 22-100, if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school, designated public school bus stop, day care center, park, playground, or other place where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  A property owner's failure to comply with provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and shall subject the property owner to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)  Each calendar month a property owner violates this provision shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2006(2), § 16-204) 
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal recreation systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Development of municipal recreation programs. 
The authority to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure time interest and needs of all municipal citizens is granted to and vested in the park and recreation board, which board shall have the power to maintain and equip parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and the buildings associated therewith, and to develop, maintain, and operate all types of recreation facilities, as provided O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 64 (O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1994, § 14-101) 
Secs. 24-2—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF GROUNDS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 24-21. - General maintenance and sanitation of premises and property. 
Each person, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1994, § 14-102(1)) 
Sec. 24-22. - Prohibited acts. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using such parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts of appurtenances thereof; signs, notices, or placards whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts, or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities, or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park. 
(7)  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the council. 
(8)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(9)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth or may be hereafter adopted. 
(10)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(2)) 
Sec. 24-23. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.; and it is unlawful for any person other than city personnel conducting city business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(b)  Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the city manager or designee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(3)) 
Sec. 24-24. - Group activity. 
(a)  Permit required. Whenever more than ten members of any group, association, or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, or theatrical or entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association, or organization shall first obtain a permit from the city manager or designee for such purpose. 
(b)  Conditions. The city manager or designee shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association, or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the said group, association, or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Indemnity bond. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(4)) 
Sec. 24-25. - Picnic areas and use. 
No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(5)) 
Sec. 24-26. - Games. 
It is unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(a)) 
Sec. 24-27. - Camping. 
It is unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(b)) 
Sec. 24-28. - Fires. 
It is unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the city manager or designee. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper, or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(c)) 
Sec. 24-29. - Animals. 
It is unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it is unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park, except guide or service dogs for blind, physically disabled and deaf persons. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(d)) 
Sec. 24-30. - Automobiles. 
It is unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(e)) 
Sec. 24-31. - Sales. 
It is unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(f)) 
Sec. 24-32. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It is unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody, or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(g)) 
Sec. 24-33. - Signs. 
It is unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1994, § 14-101(6)(h)) 
Chapter 25 - STANDARD FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAE AND TOWERS 

Sec. 25-1. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennae to serve the residents and businesses of the City of Loganville; 
(2)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennae through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(3)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(4)  Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing communication towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new communication towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Alternative tower structure shall mean man-made structures shall as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennae and towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Director means the Director of the City of Loganville Planning and Zoning Department or his/her designee. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Governing body means the Mayor and City Council for the City of Loganville. 
Guy tower means a communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
Height, when referring to a tower, antennae or other structure, means the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the bottom of the base of the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antennae positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
Lattice or self-supporting tower means a communications tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
Monopole tower means a communications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Tower means a structure, such as a self-supporting lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. The terms excludes any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antenna one meter in diameter or less, any receive-only home television antenna, and any satellite earth station antenna two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-3. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  (1)  I Light Industrial District zoning districts as a use by right; provided however, such towers satisfy all of the conditions in sections 25-4 and 25-5 of this chapter and do not exceed 150 feet in height. 
(2)  C-N Neighborhood Commercial District, C-H Highway Commercial District, and CBD Central Business District; provided however, such towers satisfy all of the conditions in sections 25-4 and 25-5 of this chapter and do not exceed the following height limitation: 
a.  For a single user, no more than 70 feet in height; 
b.  For two users, no more than 100 feet in height; and 
c.  For three or more users, no more than 150 feet in height. 
(3)  C-N Neighborhood Commercial District, C-H Highway Commercial District, and CBD Central Business District, zoning districts as a special use when such towers do exceed the tower heights permitted as in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) above; provided however, such towers also satisfy all of the requirements in sections 25-4 and 25-5 of this chapter. 
(4)  R-44, R-22, R-16 Single-Family Residential Districts; R-M4, R-M6, R-M8 Residential Multifamily District; and O-I Office Institutional Districts as a special use; provided however, such towers also satisfy all of the requirements in sections 25-4 and 25-5 of this chapter. 
(5)  Guy towers shall not be permitted with the C-N Neighborhood Commercial District, C-H Highway Commercial District, and CBD Central Business District zoning districts. 
(b)  Rooftop-mounted communications towers and antennae may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative tower structures in the city so long as: 
(1)  Such tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off-site residence and separated from any residentially zoned property at least a distance equal to two times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than 100 feet; 
(2)  The existing freestanding nonresidential structure other than a tower on which such tower or antenna will be placed 50 feet in height or greater and the tower and antenna will add no more than 20 feet total to the height of said existing structure; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower; 
(4)  No signs or illumination are permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views; and 
(5)  The number and location of antennae, communication towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure is not excessive and does not adversely affect adjacent properties and views. 
(c)  Prohibitions. No new cell may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new cell is to serve. For the purpose of this chapter, the search area is defined as the grid for the placement of the antenna. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-4. - General requirements. 
The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennae, governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Building codes: Safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communication towers at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the director. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the communications towers and antennae governed by this chapter shall bring such communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. 
b.  Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
(3)  Security. Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, the director or the governing body may waive such requirements for alternative tower structures. 
(4)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. 
e.  Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antenna, and shall be freestanding where the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower. 
(7)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows: 
a.  For towers 150 feet tall or less, a buffer area no less than six feet wide shall commence at the property line. 
b.  For towers more than 150 feet tall, a buffer area not less than ten feet wide shall be provided at the property line. 
c.  The buffer zone is to consist of materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of planting. 
d.  Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed 20 feet in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff/maintenance. 
e.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
f.  In lieu of these standards, the director may allow use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses. The plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions above, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes and/or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal such as remote agricultural or rural locations or develop heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the director. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
b.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation and general requirements of this chapter are met, towers may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. The minimum distance between a tower and other principal use located on the same lot shall be for a monopole or lattice tower the greater of 20 percent of the tower height or 25 feet and for a guy tower the greater of 100 percent breakpoint or 25 feet. This separation is required to assure compatibly of land uses and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
(10)  Tower lot size, setbacks and separations. 
a.  The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to: 
1.  Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in subsections (6) and (7) of this section; 
2.  Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property; 
3.  Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 25-6. 
b.  A site is presumed to be of sufficient size when it: 
1.  Meets the requirements of the above subsection (10)a; 
2.  Provides a setback equal to two times the height of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street; and 
3.  Provides a setback equal to or exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property where the adjoining property is not in a residential district nor a public property or a public street. 
c.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
d.  For a guyed structure, the site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide a setback equal to at least the height of the tower from a guy anchor to any property line abutting a residential district, public property or public street in addition to the size required to comply with subsection (10)b, above. Such setback shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties. 
e.  All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the transmission tower shall be located to meet the setbacks required in the zoning district where the tower is to be located. To encourage and accommodate shared use of a tower, the director may waive or reduce setback requirements by up to 50 percent to accommodate the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment at a tower site. 
f.  No freestanding communication tower shall be allowed within a 1,000-foot radius of an existing tower within a residential area. 
g.  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard of a residential district. 
h.  All freestanding towers constructed after October 1, 1996, shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements: 

 
Towers and antennae mounted on rooftops or alternative tower structures shall be exempt from these minimum separation distances. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-5. - Shared use. 
All new towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional uses technically practicable. 
(1)  To encourage shared use of towers, no building permit or special use permit shall be required for the addition of antenna(e) to an existing tower so long as the height of the tower or structure on which the antenna is placed is not increased and the requirements of subsection 25-3(b) and section 25-4 are met. 
(2)  If a new tower is approved, the owner shall be required as conditions of approval, to: 
a.  Record the letter of intent required by subsection 25-7(10) in miscellaneous deed records of the office of the county clerk, of the Superior Court where the tower site is located; 
b.  Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential shared use applicant; 
c.  Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties; and 
d.  Allow shared use where the third party seeking such use agrees in writing to pay reasonable, pro rata charges for sharing, including all charges necessary to modify the tower and transmitters to accommodate shared use, but not total tower reconstruction, and to observe whatever technical requirements are necessary to allow shared use without creating interference. 
(3)  Willful, knowing failure of an owner whose tower was approved after the effective date of this chapter, to comply with the requirement of subsection (2) above, shall be grounds for withholding approval of any application by such owner for a building permit or special use permit for any tower or antenna. 
(4)  Such conditions shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent purchasers of the tower site. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-6. - Conditional zoning permits. 
(a)  A request for a conditional zoning permit shall be initiated by application to the director and handled in accordance with the conditional zoning permit provision of section 900 of the zoning resolution of the City of Loganville. The zoning appeals board may issue a conditional zoning permit under this section, provided, it shall have determined that all of the general requirements of section 25-4 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(b)  In granting a conditional zoning permit, the zoning appeals board may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding property. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-7. - Application procedures. 
Application for a building permit for any communication tower or use of an alternative tower structure shall be made to the director. An application will not be considered until it is complete. A complete application must contain the following: 
(1)  Inventory of existing sites. An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The director may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional zoning permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennae within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that the director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(2)  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of tower(s), guy anchors (if any), transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
(3)  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 25-4(7). 
(4)  Utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(5)  An environmental impact statement fully describing the effects that the proposed tower and/or antenna will have on the environment and surrounding area including the radiological impact on human health, impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes. 
(6)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in Georgia that the construction of the tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, etc., service enjoyed by adjacent properties. 
(7)  A description of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(8)  Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
a.  Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included. 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated. 
c.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure. 
d.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
(9)  Written statements from the FAA, FCC and any appropriate state review authority stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations. 
(10)  Letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower structure and to lease additional excess land on the tower site when the share use potential of the tower is absorbed, if structurally and technically possible. 
(11)  A reasonable pro rata charge may be made for shared use, consistent with an appropriate sharing of construction, financing and maintenance costs. Fees may also be charged for any structural or RF changes necessitated by such shared use. Such sharing shall be condition of approval if approval is granted. 
a.  The applicant shall describe what range of charges are reasonably expected to be assessed against shared users. 
b.  The applicant shall base charges on generally accepted accounting principles and shall explain the elements included in the charge. 
(12)  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitation and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
(13)  Evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. 
(14)  Each applicant must make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned towers can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/transmitter as described below. 
a.  The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height of the tower proposed by the applicant. A list shall be provided of all owners contacted, the date of such contact, and the form and content of such contact. 
b.  Such contact shall be made in a timely manner, that is, sufficiently before the filing of an application for a building or conditional zoning permit to include a response into the application when filed. 
1.  Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, where an existing or planned tower is known to have capacity for additional antennae of the sort proposed, based on the decision regarding such tower, that application for a new tower shall not be complete until the owner of the existing or planned tower responds. Such response is to be required as a condition of approval. 
2.  The director shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each owner. 
3.  Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by applicant cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower as described below, the owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennae of the sort proposed. 
c.  The applicant shall request the following information from each owner contacted: 
1.  Identification of the site by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and tower height. 
2.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna. 
3.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required. 
4.  If structurally able, would shared use by such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to RF interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed tower, if at all. 
5.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use. 
d.  Shared use is not precluded simply because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower. The director and the governing body may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs and reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. 
(15)  Any other information which may be requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed tower and/or antenna. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-8. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the director shall be to the zoning appeals board pursuant to section 1045 of the zoning resolution of the City of Loganville. Appeals from any decision of the zoning appeals board shall be made to the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. Any decision on a request to build a tower or for a conditional zoning permit for a tower shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-9. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All towers and antennae shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such towers. If upon inspection by the director such tower is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance. In the event such tower or antenna is not brought in compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the tower or antenna to be removed or declared a structural public nuisance as provided for in chapter 19 of the Municipal Code and removed accordingly. Delay by the city in taking action shall not be any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that communication towers and antenna not in compliance with code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-10. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned antenna or tower and the owner of the property where the tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such a tower or antenna. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may seek to have such tower or antenna declared a structural public nuisance as provided for in chapter 19 of the Municipal Code and removed accordingly. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned communication towers and antenna are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the communication tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-11. - Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All communication towers operative on October 1, 1996, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with section 805 of the Municipal Code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on an existing communication tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A communication tower that has received city approval in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing tower so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Sec. 25-12. - Public property. 
Antennae or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1996, Exh. A, § 1) 
Chapter 26 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-141) 
Sec. 26-20. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is removed or is ordered removed by the city; 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court: 
a.  The person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  The person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent, evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-144.3) 
Sec. 26-21. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-140.1) 
Sec. 26-22. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-140.2) 
Sec. 26-23. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to the precedence. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-140.3) 
Sec. 26-24. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-144.2) 
Sec. 26-25. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession; or 
(4)  The act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(5), § 22-142) 
Secs. 26-26—26-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage means and includes all refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and containers originally used for foodstuffs, as well as the packaging material for such items. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, or trash. 
Rubbish means and includes all other refuse such as pine straw, paper and paper products, leaves, hedge and grass clippings, plastic waste, etc. The word does not refer to tree stumps; tree limbs or other rubbish longer than four feet in length or larger than three inches in diameter which is too large to be ground up by conventional grinding machinery; rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid material; dirt, plaster or other building materials; refrigerators, washing machines, hot water heaters and other appliances; mattresses; furniture and other similar large or bulky items. 
Trash means and includes tree stumps, tree limbs or other rubbish longer than four feet in length or larger than three inches in diameter which is too large to be ground up by conventional grinding machinery; rocks, concrete, bricks and similar solid material; dirt, plaster or other building materials; refrigerators, washing machines, hot water heaters and other appliances; mattresses; furniture and other similar large or bulky items. 
(Code 1994, § 8-101) 
Sec. 26-55. - Keeping garbage, refuse deemed nuisance. 
The keeping of garbage in containers other than containers prescribed by this article or the keeping upon premises of refuse which is allowed to become offensive and a nuisance, shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1994, § 8-115) 
Sec. 26-56. - Abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  Any property owner, tenant, occupant, person in possession or other person, firm, corporation, or other entity allowing or causing refuse to accumulate on the premises to the point that said accumulation becomes offensive and a nuisance to the adjacent property owners shall be guilty of the city offense of public disturbance-refuse nuisance and subject to citation by the police department upon affidavit being made in writing as to the existence of this violation by any citizen of the city. 
(b)  Upon affidavit being made, the property owner, tenant, occupant, person in possession, or person creating the offensive and nuisance act shall be served with citation by the code enforcement officer or the police department as directed by the code enforcement officer and allowed to show cause, if any, why he should not be found guilty of the offense of public disturbance-refuse nuisance, and upon conviction for failure to show good cause, shall be found guilty of the offense. 
(Code 1994, § 8-116) 
Sec. 26-57. - Occupant to pay fees; use of authorized service required. 
(a)  It is found and determined that the periodic collection of refuse from all places in the city benefits all occupants of places and premises in the city, and such occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which garbage is created, accumulated or produced are liable for and shall pay the refuse collection fees established by the council. 
(b)  Refuse collection service shall be provided for by the city either by the city department of sanitation or through an independent contractor operating under formal contract with the city and it shall be mandatory for all occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of places and premises in the city in or from which refuse is created, accumulated or produced to use the collection provided for by the city. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person other than an independent contractor operating under a separate contract with the city or authorized agents and employees of the city to collect, remove or dispose of refuse in the city; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the use of garbage disposal devices as provided in the plumbing code. 
(Code 1994, § 8-105) 
Sec. 26-58. - Notification for collection. 
(a)  All occupants, persons in possession, charge or control of premises and places in or upon which refuse is created, accumulated or produced shall notify the city manager that collection of refuse from such places is required. Occupants, persons in possession, charge or control of premises and places other than private premises shall notify the city manager of the frequency of collection required. 
(b)  In the event the city enters into contract with an independent contractor, the independent contractor shall notify the citizens of this city of the change in collection procedure and furnish the citizens of this city with sufficient information for notifying the independent contractor or other of the citizens' collection needs. 
(Code 1994, § 8-110) 
Sec. 26-59. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  Fees for refuse collection shall be paid monthly. Payment of such fees shall be due on or before ten days after the billing statement is mailed from the city. 
(b)  Any fees not paid on time and falling into a delinquent status shall have a penalty imposed thereon. The penalty rate shall be published in the city hall where utility bills may be paid and be as established by the city. The payment of such fees shall be delinquent ten days after the bill for such fees has been mailed. 
(c)  The collection of delinquent fees for refuse collection shall be the same as for collection of delinquent taxes and/or water and sewer accounts. 
(Code 1994, § 8-113) 
Sec. 26-60. - Collection of miscellaneous items. 
(a)  Trash, debris, metal products and limbs will be picked up once a week by zones. 
(b)  Leaves, limbs, debris and metal products must be separated before it will be picked up. 
(c)  All debris must be placed on the curb, near the street on the shoulder between the ditch and street or on the back side of ditch. None of these items shall be placed on the street or in a drainage ditch. 
(d)  All metal products must be free of freon by a certified company or person and tagged before pickup. 
(e)  Tires, batteries and construction materials will not be picked up. No paint cans with paint in them will be picked up. 
(Ord. of 6-1-1998) 
Sec. 26-61. - Collection and disposal of refuse other than by the city. 
(a)  Refuse which is deposited in refuse containers or separate containers and not collected by the city will be collected and disposed of by the independent contractor. Such hauler shall secure a business license as provided by ordinance. All vehicles used to transport refuse shall be provided with equipment to prevent refuse from blowing out of, falling from or otherwise escaping from such vehicle. 
(b)  The independent contractor shall comply with all applicable rules and regulations established by the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 8-111) 
Sec. 26-62. - Burning of refuse. 
It is unlawful for any person to burn any refuse except as may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 16 and any regulation of the city air pollution control district, if one is adopted at a later date. 
(Code 1994, § 8-114) 
Sec. 26-63. - Time of collection. 
Collection of refuse shall be made at least once a week from private residences or as many times per week as the city manager may order from all other places. 
(Code 1994, § 8-109) 
Sec. 26-64. - Yard trimming disposal regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(b)  Placement and disposal of yard trimmings. The following prohibitions apply: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(c)  Sorting, storing and collecting yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall be collected by the city on an on-call basis. 
(2)  Tree limbs and other woody material will be collected by the city on an on-call basis at curbside. Any pickup that exceeds a pickup load equivalency shall be assessed additional charges established or approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § 1(8-119)) 
Secs. 26-65—26-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 26-87. - Property owner to provide. 
It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in which refuse is created, accumulated, or produced to provide, and at all times keep in a suitable place, not more than 100 feet from the street curb and readily accessible to the garbage collector, garbage containers capable of holding all garbage which would ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive collections. The owner of any multiple dwelling shall furnish or require his tenants to furnish proper garbage containers. Garbage containers located at multiple dwellings, if furnished by the tenants, shall be marked to indicate the apartment or flat to which they belong. 
(Code 1994, § 8-103) 
Sec. 26-88. - Requirements. 
(a)  All garbage created, accumulated or produced shall be deposited in containers of a type that is cylindrical or rectangular, light-gauge steel, plastic or galvanized receptacle, closed at one end and open at the other, equipped with one suitable handle and tight-fitting covers which will be watertight. Each container shall have a capacity of not less than five gallons nor more than 32 gallons. The containers when full shall weigh not more than 50 pounds and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. 
(b)  Fifty-five-gallon drums shall not be allowed. Business district consumers located in buildings having three or more 32 gallon containers shall provide refuse dumpsters for the collection of refuse. Every customer, whether residential or business, shall have a central location outside their building for said containers and all refuse must be in containers. 
(Code 1994, § 8-102) 
Sec. 26-89. - Restrictions on materials deposited. 
Rubbish which includes broken glass that has been crushed in a compactor may be deposited in garbage containers. All broken glass shall be set aside in a separate container, clearly visible. Human waste or animal waste and other potentially infectious materials shall not be deposited or placed in garbage containers unless such material is secured in a plastic bag or liner. 
(Code 1994, § 8-104) 
Sec. 26-90. - Location. 
(a)  No garbage containers or other containers for refuse, other than those of the contractor, shall be placed, kept, stored or located within the right-of-way of a street or alley or at a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way; provided, however, the city manager or director of sanitation may authorize the location of such containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times or any other location on an owner's property when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection and disposition of refuse by the city, or provided further that such containers may be placed at a single collection point within ten feet of the rear of a house on the driveway side. 
(b)  No container shall be placed within enclosed or open carports or within enclosed fences. 
(c)  Refuse must be in approved garbage cans or tied in bundles not more than four feet in length nor more than 55 pounds in weight and placed at a single collection point within two feet of the curb or street. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial refuse containers shall be kept on the premises at a place near the street, readily accessible to the collection vehicles. Noncontainerized businesses shall have refuse in approved garbage cans which shall be placed at a single collection point, readily accessible to the collection crew and vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 8-108) 
Secs. 26-91—26-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 26-109. - Charges for services of collection removal and disposal. 
(a)  The charges for sanitation services will be as established by the city. All Gwinnett and Walton County unified school districts requiring refuse collection from the public schools shall be upon such terms and conditions as they be mutually agreed upon or considered as a special collection point. 
(b)  The city council and the contractor may set a flat monthly rate for removal from a business establishment of extra materials such as wastepaper, wooden boxes and the like. 
(Code 1994, § 8-117) 
Sec. 26-110. - Fee for removal of excess refuse. 
(a)  The city or the independent contractor reserves the right to charge for the removal of excess refuse, which fee shall be quoted in advance. 
(b)  All garbage and rubbish removed as defined in section 26-54 will not be subject to additional fees. All trash removed as defined in section 26-54 will be assessed a fee in the amount established by the city. 
(c)  Estimated charges will be paid at city hall prior to work being accomplished. If additional charges are incurred, they will be added to the water/sewer bill as a miscellaneous charge after being approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1994, § 8-118) 
Secs. 26-111—26-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-134. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dump means as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the state environmental protection division (EPD) as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.19(2)). 
Person means as defined in section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.01). 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means as defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4-.19(2)). 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § I) 
Sec. 26-135. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The court may order: 
(1)  The publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; and/or 
(2)  The person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation. 
(c)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. The city shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(d)  The expenses incurred by the city for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(e)  In addition to actions filed by the city for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § IV) 
Sec. 26-136. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the city or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, liens on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the city may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other city issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officers in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 15 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the city manager or designee is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city shall be chargeable to the violator and the city manager or designee and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the city manager or designee shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the city, the dates of city action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § VI) 
Sec. 26-137. - Policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the city, in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to revise and update existing laws, and to institute and maintain a comprehensive city-wide program for all scrap tire management which will assure that the storage, transportation, collection, processing and disposal of scrap tires does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well-being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), intro.) 
Sec. 26-138. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § V) 
Sec. 26-139. - Management of premises. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the city including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the planning and development department or its duly designated agent and the state environmental protection division (EPD) for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
(2)  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the state environmental protection division when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq., of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. 12-8-20 et seq.) and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq. (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 391-3-4 et seq.), applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this article are more stringent. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § II) 
Sec. 26-140. - Accumulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate more than five scrap tires on or around property which they own or occupy. 
(b)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. 
(c)  Scrap tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas, or under an impermeable cover to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2006(1), § III) 
Chapter 28 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Application. Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law of this municipality relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city manager or designee. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted; 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work; and 
(5)  The date of commencement and the date of completion of the proposed work, and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Fee. Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by the city. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The city manager or designee shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or designee shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(c)  Review of application. Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the city manager or designee shall forward such application to the city officer or city employee charged with determining whether the permit should be issued, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the city manager or designee shall return the same to the city manager or designee. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of an approved application from the city manager or designee, the permit shall be issued to the applicant therefor, which permit shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city manager or designee. 
(e)  Display. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It is unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(f)  Limitation on issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 13-105(1)—(6)) 
Sec. 28-2. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the city manager or designee, who shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this chapter and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(1)) 
Sec. 28-3. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(2)) 
Sec. 28-4. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curb line of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curb line of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(3)) 
Sec. 28-5. - Defacing sidewalks, streets and curbs. 
It is unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk, or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(4)) 
Sec. 28-6. - Obstructions. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain an obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(5)) 
Sec. 28-7. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal, or property. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged on any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(6)) 
Sec. 28-8. - Private use. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(8)) 
Sec. 28-9. - Encroachments. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the city manager or designee in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(9)) 
Sec. 28-10. - Openings and stairways. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk, or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or designee in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(10)) 
Sec. 28-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), adopted March 8, 2018, reserved § 28-11, which pertained to trees and shrubs and derived from Code 1994, § 13-101(11). 
Sec. 28-12. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-101(12)) 
Sec. 28-13. - Driveways and curbs. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb or curb cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city manager or designee in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Fee. The permit fee shall be as established by the city. 
(c)  Bond. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit hereunder to file a bond with his application, conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(d)  Standards for issuance of permit. The city manager or designee shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds that: 
(1)  The plans for the proposed operation have been approved by his designees, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city manager or designee within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)  The work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(e)  Supervision. All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1994, § 13-104) 
ARTICLE II. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 28-14. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the acting city arborist or his designee who is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this article. 
Critical root zone means that area of tree roots around the tree measured to be no less than one and one-half feet in radius for every inch of trunk diameter measured four feet above the ground. 
Park and public trees and landscape means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other vegetation in public parks and on public property at public facilities, and all area owned by the city, or to which the public has free access. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or right-of-ways within the city or lying within all rights-of-ways of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
Topping means the severe cutting back of tree limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-15. - Public tree protection and care. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person except public works or designee shall cut, prune, injure or remove any living tree on or in a public highway, right-of-way, neutral ground, public park, public place, triangle, sidewalk, or other public property; or cut or disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree on public property; or spray with any chemical insecticide or herbicide or other oils or whitewash any tree on public property; or place any wire, rope, sign, poster, barricade, or other fixture on a tree or tree guard on public property; or injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any such tree. 
(1)  No person shall pile building material or other material, about any tree, plant or shrub in a street in any manner that will in any way injure such tree, plant or shrub. 
(2)  No person shall pave or place gravel, soil or other such material within 12 feet of any tree on public property, unless approved by the city manager or designee. 
(3)  No person shall dump, pour, or spill any oil, herbicide, insecticide or other deleterious matter upon any tree or tree space in any street or within the critical root zone of any tree, or keep or maintain upon any street, any receptacle from which oil or herbicide, pesticide or other deleterious matter leaks or drips, or said material onto any parking or concrete gutter so as to injure any tree on any public property. 
(4)  No person shall use the rights-of-way, parks, sidewalks, or public places to dump grass clippings, tree trimmings, rocks or refuse of any nature. 
(5)  No person shall decorate a public tree or place advertising matter, posters or political placards on trees or in public properties unless approved by city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-16. - Notification and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall injure, damage or destroy any public tree situated upon the public right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public property within the city shall promptly notify the city manager or designee of such fact and shall, within such reasonable time as specified by the city manager or designee, repair or replace the same to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(b)  Should the person fail or refuse to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed trees or plants within such reasonable time, the city manager or designee shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person responsible for the damage or destruction by, a proper action of law. In any such action, "The Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants," published by the Council of Trees and Landscape Appraisers, current edition, shall form the basis for establishing any monetary damages due for damage or destruction to the tree. In addition, the city may recover for any other damages or losses to which it is entitled by law. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-17. - City requirements. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, parks, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. All tree work taking place on public property being conducted by contractors, subcontractors, or city employees will conform to International Society of Arboriculture and ANSI 300 and Z-133 arboricultural standards for tree work. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or government entity/department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-18. - Duties of the city manager or designee. 
It shall be the expressed duty of the city manager or designee, when necessary, to issue permits, inspect tree work, require certain tree work to be performed, and enforce provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-19. - Private landowner responsibilities and rights. 
(a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not substantially obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or line of sight. 
(b)  Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location and planting of said trees is in accordance with specifications of this article and with prior approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-20. - Creation and establishment of a city tree department. 
There is hereby created and established a city tree department which shall consist of the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-21. - The public works department duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the department to study and develop and update annually, specifications for the care, conservation, pruning, planting, and replanting of publicly owned trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such information and reports will be presented annually to the city council. The department, when requested by the city manager or designee, shall consider, investigate, make findings, and make recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(b)  The department shall make operating procedures, and keep a journal of its proceedings. 
(c)  The public works department shall develop and maintain arboricultural specifications for tree care and replacement as follows: 
(1)  A list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet,) medium (20 to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). The department of public works will also create lists of trees not suitable for planting. 
(2)  The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in the arboricultural specifications. No trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, four feet; and large trees, six feet. 
(3)  No street tree shall be planted within 20 feet of any street comer, except on city property measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(4)  No tree, other than those particularly designated for planting under overhead lines by the department of public works, shall be planted under or within ten feet of a line drawn vertically below any overhead utility wire or any recorded utility right-of-way of a greater width. Trees planted within 20 feet must be of a small species listed in the arboricultural specifications developed by the department of public works. 
(5)  All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground where necessary to provide for public safety. 
(d)  Public education. It shall be the responsibility of the public works department to undertake a public arbor day planting activity and develop and/or secure and distribute tree care and tree benefit information as part of a city wide educational program. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-22. - Permit and bond. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees or tree within a public right-of-way within the city without first applying for and procuring a permit. No permit shall be required for electric utilities and their agents and contractors or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. 
(b)  Before any permit shall be issued for any tree work on public property, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000.00 for bodily injury and $100,000.00 for property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-23. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 plus restitution for damages to public trees and property. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-24. - Emergency action. 
It may become necessary, from time to time for emergency crews to prune or remove trees to provide for public safety or restore phone or electrical service. Such an action may be conducted by government, emergency or utility crews without permit so as to allow immediate action to prevent damage or correct a condition which may pose a hazard to life or property. The city manager or designee shall be notified of any such action within 24 hours of the action being initiated, by the entity taking such action, for each instance of action. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-25. - Indemnification. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant upon any street tree area on his property or under his control in such condition as to prevent it from constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any public property or right-of-way or public place within the city. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-26. - Appeals. 
Any action of the city manager or designee may be appealed to and heard by the city council. An appeal must be filed within ten calendar days after the decision of the city manager or designee. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk for placement on the city council agenda. The appeal shall clearly specify the reasons for which a hearing is requested. After a hearing, the city council shall render its decision. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Sec. 28-27. - Severability. 
Should any part or provision of this article be declared by a court of the competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof other than part held to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 03-08-2018(2), 3-8-18) 
Secs. 28-28—28-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. II has been renumbered as Art. III, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. of 03-08-2018, adopted March 8, 2018, as new Art. II. 

Sec. 28-45. - Council resolution. 
Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of the resolution file with the city manager or designee a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 39 (O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1994, § 13-102(1)) 
Sec. 28-46. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the city manager or designee in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 13-102(2)) 
Sec. 28-47. - Bond. 
Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount of $10,000.00 with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(Code 1994, § 13-102(3)) 
Sec. 28-48. - Specifications. 
(a)  Pavements and curbing to be in conformance. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the council. 
(b)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for persons with disabilities. 
(Code 1994, § 13-102(4)) 
Sec. 28-49. - Barricades. 
Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1994, § 13-102(5)) 
Secs. 28-50—28-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. III has been renumbered as Art. IV, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. of 03-08-2018, adopted March 8, 2018, as new Art. II. 

Sec. 28-72. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the city manager or designee in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(1)) 
Sec. 28-73. - Permit fee. 
The excavation permit fee to be collected by the city manager or designee shall be as established by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(2)) 
Sec. 28-74. - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city manager or designee in the amount of $10,000.00. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; and 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee, all openings and excavations made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after the work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before the work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within the two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(3)) 
Sec. 28-75. - Routing of traffic. 
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants to the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the city manager or designee may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the city manager or designee. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the city manager or designee. 
(2)  The permittee must notify the city manager or designee of any street so closed. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the city manager or designee before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(4)  Where flaggers are deemed necessary by the city manager or designee, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the city manager or designee will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are not existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the city manager or designee. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(4)) 
Sec. 28-76. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles or material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(5)) 
Sec. 28-77. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers, and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely; pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width and length, together with necessary blocking, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(6)) 
Sec. 28-78. - Interference with utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city manager or designee and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by the owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across such work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the bond of same shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit, or other utility, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(7)) 
Sec. 28-79. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times, and at its own expense, preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the city manager or designee. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(8)) 
Sec. 28-80. - Sidewalk excavations. 
Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over the excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(9)) 
Sec. 28-81. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing, or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials, structures, or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstructions. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(10)) 
Sec. 28-82. - Attractive nuisances. 
It is unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation any machinery, equipment, or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(11)) 
Sec. 28-83. - Care of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians, or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(12)) 
Sec. 28-84. - Damage to existing improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable Code provision or ordinance. If, upon being ordered to do so, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city, and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(13)) 
Sec. 28-85. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock, and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee. From time to time, as may be ordered by the city manager or designee, and in any event immediately after completion of the work, the permittee shall at its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the city manager or designee, the work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for hereunder. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(14)) 
Sec. 28-86. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(15)) 
Sec. 28-87. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the city manager or designee. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restoration to ensure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(b)  Permanent restoration of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the city manager or designee shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(16)) 
Sec. 28-88. - City's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the city manager or designee, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(17)) 
Sec. 28-89. - Prompt completion of work. 
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(18)) 
Sec. 28-90. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit, or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit, or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the office of the city manager or designee is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(19)) 
Sec. 28-91. - Noise, dust, and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust, and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the mayor or in case of an emergency as herein provided, any tool, appliance, or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(20)) 
Sec. 28-92. - Inspections. 
The city manager or designee shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(21)) 
Sec. 28-93. - Drawings. 
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans, and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the city manager or designee with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within sixty days after new installation, changes, or replacements are made. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(22)) 
Sec. 28-94. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-103(23)) 
Secs. 28-95—28-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS, DEMONSTRATIONS, ASSEMBLIES, PICKETING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 9, 2009 amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. IV, §§ 28-117—28-153, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1994, §§ 13-106(1)—13-106(6). 
Editor's note— Former Art. IV has been renumbered as Art. V, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. of 03-08-2018, adopted March 8, 2018, as new Art. II. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 28-117—28-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARADE AND DEMONSTRATION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 28-141. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by its Charter, the Code of Georgia and its general police powers, the city has adopted the following sections in order to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare in the city, to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, and to ensure the safe and unimpaired use and enjoyment of public property in places open to the general public and otherwise to regulate and control the time, place and manner of activities that would otherwise threaten or impair the public health, safety and welfare in the city while also encouraging the exercise of the rights to free speech and assembly in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-142. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings set out herein: 
Parade means any march, procession or motorcade, including recreational activities such as jogging and walking, consisting of 15 or more people, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets, sidewalks or other public areas within the city that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets, sidewalks or other public property. 
Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of 15 or more people for a common purpose as a result of prior planning that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon the streets, sidewalks or other public property within the city or that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal use of any public property in a place open to the general public. 
Spontaneous event means an unplanned or unannounced coming together of people, animals or vehicles in a parade or public assembly which was not contemplated beforehand by any participant therein and which is caused by or in response to unforeseen circumstances or events occasioned by news or affairs first coming into public knowledge within seven days of such parade or public assembly. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-143. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in a public assembly or parade on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property of the city in a place open to the general public for which a written permit has not been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Spontaneous events as defined herein; 
(2)  Funeral processions as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; 
(3)  Students going to and from school classes; 
(4)  The United States Army, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, the military forces of the state and the police and fire divisions of the city when these entities are engaged in their official duties; 
(5)  Park and recreation areas that are regulated by the city's department of parks, recreation and community facilities. 
(c)  Permits may be granted if they are requested by individuals or organizations who desire to have a permit, even though the permit is not required under this section. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-144. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to conduct a parade or public assembly shall make written application to the chief of police, or his designee, at least 45 days prior to such parade or public assembly and shall also execute a release and waiver form as well as a loss and damage form to be provided by the chief of police. Each applicant shall pay the required fee associated with the application, the amount of which shall be established by the mayor and council from time to time. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit; 
(2)  The name and address of any organization or group the applicant is representing; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as the parade or public assembly leader or chairman and who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade or public assembly; 
(4)  The type of public assembly, including a description of the activities planned during the event; 
(5)  The date and time (start and ending) of the parade or public assembly; 
(6)  If an assembly, the specific location or locations of the assembly; 
(7)  If a parade, the specific assembly and dispersal locations, the specific route, and the plans, if any, for assembly and dispersal; 
(8)  The approximate number of people who, and animals and vehicles which will, constitute such parade or public assembly and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or sidewalks or other public rights-of-way proposed to be traversed or used; 
(10)  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly; and 
(11)  Such other information as the chief of police, or his designee, may deem reasonably necessary in order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance, administrative arrangements, police and fire protection, and for the protection of pubic health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall not issue the permit if any information supplied by the applicant is false or intentionally misleading. 
(c)  The chief of police may deny or revoke a permit if an applicant has an outstanding debt with the city, or if the event is done on behalf of or in the name of a person, organization, corporation or other group that has an outstanding debt with the city, until such time as payment is received in full. 
(d)  The chief of police may deny a permit to an applicant who caused significant damage to city streets, sidewalks, parks, and/or other city real or personal property during an event for which the applicant previously was issued a permit under this article and, at the time of submitting an application for a new permit under this article, failed to adequately repair the damage or failed to pay a bill for restoration services in full, provided that the chief of police or her/his designee mailed or delivered to the host a demand for such repair or restoration compensation within 60 days after the ending date of such previous event. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-145. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall issue a permit in accordance with this article within five days of receipt of a completed application, associated forms, and payment of the permit fee, after applying the following criteria and finding that: 
(1)  The parade or assembly will not interfere with another parade or assembly for which a permit has previously been granted; and 
(2)  The parade or assembly proposed will not violate, and will conform to, all applicable state regulations and laws governing the proposed event. 
(b)  The chief of police may modify, deny or revoke a permit when, due to the scope of the event, and the number of police personnel required to provide protection and traffic control for the event, and due to the need for police personnel elsewhere in the city, the event would require the diversion of such a number of police personnel that it will be more likely than not that normal police protection elsewhere in the city cannot be provided continuously and safely for the duration of the event. 
(c)  For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for an annual permit covering all such parades or assemblies during the calendar year may be filed with the chief of police, or his designee, at least five and not more than 30 days before the date and time at which the first such parade or public assembly is proposed to commence. The chief of police, or his designee, may and shall make reasonable efforts to consider an application hereunder which is filed less than five days before the date and time at which the first parade or assembly is proposed to commence, after due consideration of the facts specified in this article. 
(d)  If two or more applications are submitted requesting a permit under this article for a parade or assembly to be used at the same time and place, the application first filed shall be granted if it meets the requirements of this article. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall permit the chief of police, or his designee, to deny a permit based upon political, social or religious grounds or reasons or based upon the content of the views expressed or the viewpoint of the speaker. Denial of a permit on such grounds is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-146. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, or his designee, in denying a permit for a parade or public assembly shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade or assembly on a date, at a time, at a place, or over a route different from that proposed by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police, or his designee. An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-147. - Compliance with directions and conditions. 
(a)  Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall comply with all permit terms and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade or assembly chairman or other person heading or leading the parade or assembly shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade or assembly and show the permit when requested to do so. 
(b)  Each permit holder under this article shall insure that the site of the event for which the permit was issued is cleaned and restored to the condition in which it was found prior to the holding of the event. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in additional fees for garbage pickup and/or cleanup being assessed against the permit holder as determined by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-148. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article if any information supplied by the applicant is discovered to be false or intentionally misleading; if any term, condition, restriction or limitation of the permit has been substantially violated; or if there is any continued violation of the terms, conditions, restrictions or limitations of the permit after the applicant or anyone acting in concert with him is notified of a violation of the permit by an appropriate law enforcement official. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-149. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the chief of police, or his designee, to grant a permit or by the revocation of a permit after one has been issued, may appeal the denial or revocation by filing with the city manager's office, within five working days after the date of the denial or revocation, a written notice of the appeal setting forth the grounds therefore. The city manager shall act upon the appeal within five business days after its receipt by either affirming the decision of the chief of police, overturning the decision of the chief of police by granting the permit, or overturning the decision of the chief of police by granting the permit with conditions. 
(b)  The decision of the chief of police, or his designee, or the city manager or his designee, may be appealed to the Superior Court of Walton County pursuant to a writ of certiorari. 
(c)  The city shall meet all deadlines set by the court and by applicable statutes and court rules, and shall otherwise seek to assure that the appeal, including any motion for preliminary relief, is decided as expeditiously as possible. The city shall bear the burden of proof on any appeal under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-150. - Public conduct during parades, demonstrations and assemblies. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, demonstration or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade, demonstration or assembly for which a written permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a parade, demonstration or assembly except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles such as fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles. 
(c)  Parking on parade, demonstration or assembly route. The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the public streets or public rights-of-way constituting a part of the route of a parade, demonstration or assembly. The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall post signs on any effected streets notifying the public of parking restrictions due to the parade or assembly. Such signs shall be posted at least two days prior to the event for which a permit has been issued. Failure to post the signs required herein shall result in revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article. No person shall be liable for parking on a street that does not contain signs posted in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 28-151. - Violation of ordinance. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person found in violation of any provision of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Loganville Municipal Court and the provisions of article IV, section 4.13 of the City of Loganville Charter. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2009, § 1) 
Secs. 28-152—28-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, adopted March 9, 2017, set out provisions adding Art. V. To preserve the existing Art. V, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as Art. VI. 

Sec. 28-176. - Traffic calming guidelines. 
Traffic calming guidelines refer to those guidelines developed and issued by the City of Loganville's Streets and Highway Division of the Public Utilities Department. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Sec. 28-177. - Traffic calming device. 
Traffic calming device means a roadway feature implemented to reduce vehicular speed as designated by the city's streets and highway division of the public utilities department. Such devices include but are not limited to speed humps. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Sec. 28-178. - Criteria for traffic calming devices. 
(a)  Location of road. Traffic calming devices may be installed only on roads within residential districts as defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Street classification. Traffic calming devices may be installed only on two lane roads maintained by the city and listed on the City of Loganville Master Road List. 
(c)  Speed and traffic volume. Before the city will consider installing traffic calming devices in a particular area, the city's streets and highway division of the public utilities department will conduct a traffic study. In order to be considered for the installation of traffic calming devices, the traffic study must show that a speeding problem exists, based upon the standard of an 85th percentile speed of at least ten miles per hour over the posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. In addition, the average daily traffic on the road in question must be less than 4,000 vehicles. 
(d)  Road accommodations. The road in question must be able to accommodate traffic calming devices in such a way that that none of the traffic calming devices are located in curves or on hills; moreover, the road must be such that traffic calming devices can be spaced between 250 feet to 500 feet apart. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Sec. 28-179. - Procedures for approval. 
(a)  Petition for traffic calming devices. Property owners desiring the installation of traffic calming devices on a road that they use for access to their property must petition the city streets and highway division of the public utilities department to conduct a feasibility study for traffic calming devices on said road. Seventy-five percent of the property owners using the road for access to their property must sign the petition. Only one signature per household will be counted. 
(b)  Streets and highway division feasibility study and report. Once a properly executed petition is submitted to the city streets and highway division of the public utilities department, the division shall conduct a study on the road proposed for traffic calming devices to find out if the road meets the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  City council approval. The city streets and highway division of the public utilities department shall submit its report to the city council regarding the findings of the feasibility study, along with a copy of the landowners' petition. Once the city council receives a copy of said report and petition, a resolution shall be presented to city council for final approval or disapproval of the installation of traffic calming devices on the road in question. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Sec. 28-180. - Construction of traffic calming devices. 
Traffic calming devices shall be constructed in accordance with the guidelines established by the city streets and highway division of the public utilities department. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Sec. 28-181. - Neighborhood cost share. 
(a)  Installation of the traffic calming devices will be shared by the city (50 percent) and the applicant (50 percent). 
(b)  Any landscaping, including maintenance, will be paid entirely by the applicant. 
(c)  Easement and right-of-way acquisition shall be provided by the applicant. 
(d)  Repair and routine maintenance of all traffic calming devices, excluding landscape maintenance and design enhancements, will be the city's responsibility. 
(Ord. of 03-09-2017(1), § 1, 3-9-17) 
Chapter 30 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 30-19. - Review of digest; levy of tax. 
Upon receiving the digest from Walton County and Gwinnett County, the city manager or designee shall review the same in order to assure its accuracy, bringing any errors discovered to the attention of the appropriate county officials for correction. Once this has been accomplished, the clerk shall lay before the city council such final digest for the purpose of their establishing the millage rate, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 30-20. - Billing; due date of taxes; authority to extend. 
Within 30 days after the levy by the council, the city manager or designee shall prepare and mail tax bills to all taxpayers. Ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable by November 15 of each taxable year; provided, however, in no event shall taxes be due or payable on or before 60 days after the date bills are mailed by the city manager or designee. If bills are not mailed by November 20 of a taxable year, then taxes for such year shall be due 60 days after the mailing date. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 30-21. - Payment of taxes by mail. 
Taxes paid by mail shall be considered paid on the date of the postmark on such letter that contains full payment of the taxes due. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 30-22. - Penalty and interest. 
The city manager or designee shall assess a penalty of ten percent on all taxes unpaid on the date due. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 30-23. - Collection of delinquent taxes, etc.; revocation of licenses, etc.; interest; appeal. 
(a)  Fi. fa. issued. For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city manager or designee and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  Lien on property. A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(c)  Costs and interest added. The cost pf the execution in subsection (a) of this section as well as any interest or penalty thereon shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Revocation of licenses, etc.; appeal. Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city manager or designee for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, that any persons aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the city council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license, privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the action was not factually or legally correct. 
(Ord. of 11-10-1994, § 6) 
State Law reference— Executions, O.C.G.A. §§ 9-13-1 et seq., 48-3-1 et seq.; tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Secs. 30-24—30-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 12, 2009, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 30-50—30-64, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1994, §§ 4-105(2)—4-105(16). 
State Law reference— Local hotel-motel taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 30-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests in return for rent paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, or prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement. However, the term occupant shall not include state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of these premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgage in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating that hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Quarterly period means the quarter of any year as follows: The first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Rent means the consideration received or occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-51. - Imposition and rate. 
There is levied and assessed, and there shall be paid, a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-52. - Persons liable; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this city is liable for the tax. His or her liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the city, except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this city or from an operator who is authorized by the city manager or designee, under such rules and regulations as the city manager or designee may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this section, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this city, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 30-53 hereof, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-53. - Collection by operator; receipt of occupant; collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the city as defined herein and renting guestrooms in the city who is not exempted under section 30-55 shall, at the time of collecting payment from the occupant, also collect the tax levied herein. Upon request by the occupant, the operator shall give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the operator shall be liable for payment of the tax at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The city manager or designee shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-54. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-55. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be levied as provided in this article under the following circumstances: 
(1)  No tax shall be levied or imposed under this article on local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(2)  No tax shall be levied or imposed for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(3)  The tax shall be levied or imposed on the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations during the first ten days of continuous occupancy but shall not be levied and imposed on charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. 
(4)  No tax shall be levied or imposed upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for use as meeting rooms or to any rooms, lodgings or accommodations provided without charge. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-56. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Registration; information required. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the city shall immediately register with the city manager or designee on a form provided by the city manager or designee. Persons engaged in this business must so register no later than 15 days after the date the tax becomes effective and is imposed as set forth in section 30-51, but the privilege of registration imposed after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the city manager or designee may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. 
(b)  Certificate of authority. The city manager or designee shall, after this registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from an occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and person seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the city manager or designee upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of business at that location. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-57. - Returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date for taxes. All taxes levied and imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month following each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(b)  Returns and time for filing returns; remittance of tax; extension of time for filing. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period in which such taxes are collected, each operator of each hotel shall file a return with the city manager or designee showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rent from government officials or employees while traveling on official business, rent from persons certifying the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty, taxable rent, amount of taxes due for the related period and such other information as may be required by the city manager or designee. Accompanied with each return when filed shall be the remittance of the net amount of tax due. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-58. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the city manager or designee has reason to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city as provided herein is incorrect, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. If the city manager or designee determines a deficiency exists after a recomputation of the tax, the amount of deficiency, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In recomputing the tax, the city manager or designee may offset overpayments for a period or periods against underpayments for another period or periods. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection 30-59(c). 
(d)  Notice of determination; service. The city manager or designee, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his findings after recomputation. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears in the records of the city manager or designee. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit with the United States Postal Service. 
(e)  Three-year limit. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 15th day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-59. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city manager or designee shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax for the period in question. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in the city manager's or designee's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city manager or designee shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation. In making a determination as provided in this action, the city manager or designee may offset overpayments against penalties, and/or against the interest on any underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount due. The amount due as a result of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the date on which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date payment is made. 
(d)  Notice of deficiency to be served. Within ten days of making a determination under this section, the city manager or designee shall notify the operator in writing an shall serve such notice personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-60. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the city of any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city within the time required shall pay interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in subsection 30-59(c). 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-61. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. When it is determined by a return filed, or by the city manager or designee having made a determination under the provisions of sections 30-58 or 30-59 of this article that tax is due and payable to the city under the provisions of this article, the city manager or designee may at any time within three years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount of tax payable to the city together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a Fi. Fa. under the provisions of subsection (d) this section. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this article sells or transfers his/her business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon, and penalties, and pay such sum over to the city unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the city manager or designee showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on said returns have been paid in full. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; time to enforce successors' liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he/she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his/her business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(d)  Issuance of Fi. Fa. The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to issue a Fi. Fa. for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-62. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of city manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the imposition of the hotel-motel tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The city manager or designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this section or other laws of the city, county and the state, or the Constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager or designee my require. 
(d)  Examination of records. The city manager or designee or any person authorized by the city manager may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Reports as required. In administration of the tax, the city manager or designee may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager or designee when he requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date of occupancy and such other information as the city manager or designee may require. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-63. - Applicability. 
This section shall not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the council to impose the tax. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-64. - Violations; fines and punishment. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of the City Code. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein or to furnish any return required to be made or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city manager or designee or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(c)  If after a hearing held before the municipal court, the court shall find that any person or operator has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses held by said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel accommodations shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing to be held not less than five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing addressed to the owner, manager or operator at his/her last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from his civil liability for the payment of the tax, nor for prosecution of such offense. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-65. - Appropriation of sums collected. 
All sums collected under this article shall be expended for any purpose authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3)(A). 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Sec. 30-66. - Effective date of tax. 
There shall be no break or suspension in the effective date of the tax imposed under this article. The effective date of the tax imposed herein shall be the date on which the city first imposed a hotel/motel tax within the city. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2009) 
Secs. 30-67—30-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), except for code sections 40-6-245, 40-6-393 and 40-6-394 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in full herein. To the extent authorized by state law, the court is authorized to grant probation or suspend or defer any sentence imposed for a violation of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 7-101; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-1, 1989; Ord. of 10-9-2008, § 2(16-112)) 
Sec. 32-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the city manager or designee may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary regulations, who violates them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 7-102; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-2, 1989) 
Sec. 32-3. - Traffic signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  The city manager or designee, upon approval by ordinance of the city council, is authorized to designate and maintain with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; those in excess of ten tons and exceeding 28 feet in length, with exception to immediate delivery within these areas and not to exceed 30 minutes; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no-parking zones and regulations thereon; in that no vehicle shall be parked in areas designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking of large commercial or privately owned vehicles, tractor trailers or unattached trailers to park in any places unless loading or unloading, not to exceed one hour, with exception to moving trucks/vans; 
(6)  Stop, yield, and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The city manager or designee is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this chapter, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the city council and this schedule is incorporated herein and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 7-104; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-4, 1989; Ord. of 9-13-2001) 
Sec. 32-4. - Obstruction by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in this city shall erect any fence, wall or other structure or permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross-intersecting streets. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 7-105; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-5, 1989) 
Sec. 32-5. - Unauthorized or obstructive sign or signal; removal. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain within the right-of-way of any public road in the city, any sign, signal or other device except as required or authorized by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 or any other law. 
(b)  Any sign, signal, device or other structure erected, placed or maintained on the right-of-way of any public road in violation of subsection (a) of this section or O.C.G.A. § 40-6-25 is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city may remove or direct the removal of the same. Where any sign, signal or device or other structure is erected, placed or maintained in violation of this subsection, but not on the right-of-way of any public road, the city may order the removal of such structure by written notice to the owner of the structure or the owner of the land on which the structure is located. If such structure is not removed within 30 days after the giving of such order of removal, city officials are authorized to remove or cause to be removed such structure and to submit a statement of expenses incurred in the removal to the owner of the structure or to the owner of the land on which structure is located. If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of said statement, the city council shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. 
(Code 1994, § 7-106; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-6, 1989) 
Sec. 32-6. - City cemeteries. 
All vehicular traffic traveling through, within, parking or standing in any city cemetery shall remain on paved drives, except during funerals, memorial services and legal holidays. 
(Code 1994, § 7-107; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-1-7, 1989) 
Sec. 32-7. - Speed zones. 
(a)  The speed zones of the city are established based on a traffic engineering investigation as required by state law. 
(1)  State Route 10/US 78. 
(2)  State Route 20. 
(3)  State Route 81. 
(b)  It is unlawful to use radar detection devices on any state route, county road or city street not listed on the permit issued by the department of public safety. 
(c)  This article includes all construction/work zones on any state route posted with the statutory 40 miles per hour speed limit. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by state law. 
(e)  Signs to be erected by the department of transportation. 
(Code 1994, § 7-401) 
State Law reference— Speed limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq. 
Sec. 32-8. - Limited load streets. 
It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street where the weight of the vehicle permitted on such street is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted. It is unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the purpose of making a delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for the purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 7-204; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-2-4, 1989) 
State Law reference— Vehicle size and load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq.; enforcement of load limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-27. 
Sec. 32-9. - Coasters, roller skates and skateboards. 
(a)  No person upon coasters, roller skates (blades) or skateboards shall go upon any roadway or sidewalk of the downtown business district of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any persons coasting, skating or skateboarding to gather in crowds or create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or take hold of any automobile or other vehicle or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of any automobile or other vehicle along and in the streets of the city. 
(c)  The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If an offender is under the age of 17 years, the offense shall be dealt with as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2001, § 7-110) 
Secs. 32-10—32-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 32-37. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway or street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding the space. 
(Code 1994, § 7-301; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-1, 1989) 
Sec. 32-38. - Manner of parking when no specific provisions. 
On all streets or alleys in the city for which no special parking provisions have been made, no person shall park a vehicle parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway if a minimum of ten feet of unprotected passageway shall not remain for the passage of other vehicles. 
(Code 1994, § 7-302; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-2, 1989); 
Sec. 32-39. - Prohibited where so posted. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle or other vehicle, including, but not limited to, large commercial or privately owned vehicle, tractor trailer or unattached trailer, to park in any place on the streets, rights-of-way, alleys or residential properties of the city specifically designated by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1994, § 7-304; Ord. of 9-13-2001) 
Sec. 32-40. - Prohibited during times so posted. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to park the vehicle in any of the places on the days and between the hours indicated and specified by posted signs indicating the prohibited parking. 
(Code 1994, § 7-305; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-5, 1989) 
Sec. 32-41. - Time limited when so posted. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any of the places on the streets and alleys of the city in excess of the time indicated and specified by posted signs limiting parking time in certain locations on certain days and hours. 
(Code 1994, § 7-306; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-6, 1989) 
Sec. 32-42. - Congested areas. 
(a)  In any areas designated by the council as congested areas pursuant to sections 32-3(a)(5) and 32-41, no vehicle may remain parked in such zone for more than two hours. The right front tire tread of each vehicle so parked shall be marked by the city manager or designee with a chalk to determine if the vehicle has parked more than the two-hour limit. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to tamper with or erase the chalk marks placed on such tires while those tires are parked in the congested area. 
(c)  The two-hour limitation shall be in effect on weekdays from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., except Wednesday after 12:00 noon. Said sections shall also be effective on each Saturday from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. 
(Code 1994, § 7-307; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-7, 1989) 
Sec. 32-43. - Special purpose parking zones. 
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of any motor vehicle, or other vehicle to park the vehicle or allow the vehicle to remain parked in any location on the streets and alleys of the city established and designated as special purpose parking zones indicated and specified by posted signs approved by the city council, except in accordance with such posted regulations. 
(Code 1994, § 7-308; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-8, 1989) 
Sec. 32-44. - Temporary suspension of no parking rules in residential areas. 
In any residential area where absolutely no parking is permitted due to traffic hazards, if the property owner desires that the no parking rule be suspended for a reasonable time because of unusual circumstances, such as a wedding or a funeral, then the property owner shall file in writing with the city manager or designee a written application for an exception to the no parking rule specifying the date, time and place; and the city manager or designee may in his discretion grant a temporary suspension of the no parking rule. Such exception shall be requested at least 48 hours in advance of the special activity, except for funerals for which approval of exceptions shall be requested two hours prior to the event. 
(Code 1994, § 7-309; Ord. No. 89-9, § 01-3-9, 1989) 
Sec. 32-45. - Parking vehicles for purpose of sale. 
No vehicle shall be parked in a commercial parking lot or place or business and offered for sale, except in lots designated for car lot sales. The designated car lot sales must be licensed by the city as such so that vehicles are not arbitrarily parked and offered for sale. Vehicles may be towed at owner's expense within 24 hours upon notice of violation. Notice may be written on a code violation form and posted on the said vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2001, § 7-310) 
Sec. 32-46. - Parking on street for more than ten days. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of ten days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the municipality. 
(Code 1994, § 16-110) 
Sec. 32-47. - Vehicle repair and parking on private property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Major vehicle repair means any maintenance, repair or replacement not listed in the definition of minor vehicle repair including, but not limited to, the removal of engines, rebuilding of engines, repair of the internal components, repair or removal of transmissions, repair or removal of differentials or axles, dismantling of vehicles, and body work. 
Minor vehicle repair means maintenance, repair or replacement of the alternator, generator, starter, water pump, fuel pump, battery or brakes or parts thereof; minor tune-up (which consists of distributor cap, rotor and spark plug replacement); change of oil and filter, fan belt, or hoses; lamp replacement; repair of flat tires; lubrication; and spot painting. 
Vehicle means a self-propelled device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  Minor vehicle repair. It is unlawful for any person to engage in minor vehicle repair on any residential property: 
(1)  Upon any vehicle which is not registered to a current occupant of the premises where the work is being performed; 
(2)  Outside a fully enclosed structure, except that minor vehicle repair may be performed outside a fully enclosed structure where elapsed time between the beginning and end of the repair does not exceed 48 hours; or 
(3)  Upon more than two vehicles at one time on the same premises or by the same person. 
(c)  Major vehicle repair. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in major vehicle repair on any residential property, unless all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The repair is performed within a fully enclosed structure; 
b.  The vehicle under repair is registered to a current occupant of the premises; and 
c.  No more than two vehicles are being repaired at one time on the same premises or by the same person. 
(2)  Subsection (b)(1) of this section notwithstanding, body painting, other than spot painting, is not permitted on a residential property. 
(d)  Engaging in vehicle repair defined. A person engages in minor or major vehicle repair when the person performs the repair, or permits the vehicle repair to be performed on said person's property, or arranges for such work to be performed on his vehicle knowing that it will be performed on a residential property. 
(e)  Accumulation of vehicle parts. It is unlawful to keep, store, or accumulate vehicle parts and auto body parts outside a residential structure which are within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public right-of-way and which constitute visual blight or reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or are offensive to the senses or are detrimental to nearby property or property values. 
(f)  Parking on private property. It is unlawful for any person to park, permit to be parked, or allow to be parked, any vehicle upon any: 
(1)  Privately owned property in the city without the consent of the owner of such privately owned property; 
(2)  Unimproved surface. The term "unimproved surface" includes any surface which is not paved, asphalted or graveled; 
(3)  Vacant improved or unimproved property within the city when such vehicle is offered for sale, excepting from a licensed car dealer sales lot. 
(g)  Citation issued to owner. A citation may be issued to the registered owner of any vehicle found to be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2006(1), § 16-114) 
Sec. 32-48. - Parking in culs-de-sac or dead-end streets in residential neighborhoods. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, trailer, boat or other conveyance, required to be registered with the Secretary of State or other governmental agency for use on a public roadway in a cul-de-sac or dead-end public street. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2011(1), § 1) 
Sec. 32-49. - Driving and parking over curb or on sidewalk prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk, sidewalk area, planting strip, shoulder, or over the constructed curbing on a roadway, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle across a sidewalk in a manner that in any way obstructs or prohibits use of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2011(1), § 2) 
Sec. 32-50. - Repair and maintenance prohibited on a public street. 
No person shall wash, perform maintenance, or perform repair work on any vehicle parked upon a roadway, except that a person may perform repairs that are necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2011(1), § 3) 
Sec. 32-51. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The restrictions of section 32-38 and the restrictions of sections 32-48 through 32-50 shall not apply to a service vehicle, such as an emergency vehicle (ambulance, police vehicle, fire truck, etc.) while it is providing emergency services at a residence or to a temporarily standing delivery vehicle making deliveries. 
(b)  The restrictions of section 32-38 and the restrictions of sections 32-48 through 32-50 shall not apply to the parking of vehicles performing construction-related activities on a roadway in front of premises where construction is underway, for which construction a current and valid building permit has been issued by the City of Loganville and said permit is properly displayed on the premises; or on a roadway in front of premises where construction not requiring a building permit (e.g., landscaping) is underway. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2011(1), § 4) 
Sec. 32-52. - Penalty. 
Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed in accordance with the tow provisions of the traffic code. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2011(1), § 5) 
Secs. 48-53—48-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES 

Sec. 32-68. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  No person shall drive a wrecker service vehicle in response to a police-initiated call for service upon the streets of the city without first having obtained a wrecker operator's permit to do so from the city. 
(b)  Any person desiring a wrecker operator's permit shall make written application to the city manager or designee upon forms to be furnished by the city. The application shall give the age and home address of the applicant, shall state whether he has ever been convicted of any offense specified in section 32-69, and if so, he shall furnish a complete and detailed statement of these convictions. The term "permit" refers to the permission to operate regarding the allowed regulations pertaining to nonconsensual towing only. 
(c)  No wrecker operator permit shall be granted unless the applicant is at least 18 years old and has an appropriate driver's license for the class of equipment he is operating. 
(d)  An administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall be paid to the city by each applicant at the time his original application is filed and an annual administrative fee in the amount established by the city shall also be paid at the time of each renewal of an existing permit. 
(e)  Duplicate permits may be obtained by the payment of a fee in the amount established by the city. 
(f)  Each permit set forth in this section shall be renewed on an annual basis during the month of December in each and every year. 
(g)  Any wrecker operator permit issued under this article shall be valid only when the person issued the permit is driving for the business shown on the permit. Any driver operating without valid permit and any wrecker service business employing a driver without a valid permit shall be in violation of this article. 
(h)  The city manager or designee shall investigate each applicant for a wrecker service driver's permit, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or designee to cause an investigation to be made to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant, and knowledge of the applicant of the provisions of this article and the provisions of this Code pertaining to traffic regulations in the city and the rules of the road of the state. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-501) 
Sec. 32-69. - Operator's standards. 
(a)  No wrecker operator's permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Manslaughter or negligent homicide resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle; 
(2)  Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs. Any convictions under this subsection (a)(2) shall not bar the issuance of a permit if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of application; 
(3)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used; 
(4)  Failure to stop and render aid as required under the laws of this state, or leaving the scene of an accident as specified by the laws of this state; 
(5)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statement under oath in connection with one's application for a driver's permit; 
(6)  Convictions, or forfeiture of bail, not vacated, upon three charges of violation of the motor vehicle laws of this state within a period of 12 months; 
(7)  Conviction of the violation of any law involving violence, theft or any form of stealing, or any crime involving moral turpitude that is reasonably related to the permit referred to herein, within five years preceding the filing of the application for this permit; 
(8)  Repeated violations of the city ordinances which affect the safety of human life or limb on the streets of the city; or 
(9)  Possession by a wrecker service driver within his wrecker of intoxicating liquors or controlled substances as provided by laws of the state regarding commercial vehicle operation. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every driver of a wrecker service vehicle to tow vehicles in a professional manner. The operating personnel of wrecker units shall be technically qualified and physically capable of responding immediately to all calls received. 
(c)  Reasonable care must be taken to ensure no further damage will occur to a towed or impounded vehicle by either carelessness or natural elements, and the wrecker service shall use the proper equipment (i.e., wheel lifts) in order to prevent further damage to the vehicles towed. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the driver of any wrecker vehicle which shall tow any motor vehicle away from the scene of any wreck which may occur in the city to sweep or otherwise remove all broken glass, metal, plastic, and other debris located at the scene from the public street, and to stabilize all oils, fuels, or other fluids with the proper absorbent prior to leaving the scene of the wreck. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-502) 
Sec. 32-70. - Operation of wrecker service. 
(a)  Each wrecker service shall display in a conspicuous manner either painted or permanently affixed thereto on each side of each of its vehicles the name, address, and phone number of its business establishment as provided by the laws of the state regarding commercial vehicles for hire. 
(b)  A wrecker service shall not monitor police frequencies for the purpose of monetary gain. 
(c)  Unless directed to respond to the scene of a traffic accident and/or traffic violation by the city police department or the Walton County communication center radio dispatcher, no wrecker service shall remove a vehicle from the scene without reporting such removal. 
(d)  Each wrecker service vehicle shall be equipped with an emergency rotating and/or flashing amber light which shall be operated while at the scene of any disabled and/or abandoned vehicle and while the vehicle is under tow. 
(e)  Each wrecker service shall equip each wrecker service vehicle with chains, fire extinguisher, broom, shovel, and sand or absorbent material to stabilize oil, fuel or other fluids. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of any wrecker service which shall tow any motor vehicle away from the scene of any wreck which may occur in the city to sweep or otherwise remove all broken glass, metal, plastic, and other debris located at the scene from the public street, and to stabilize all oils, fuels, or other fluids with the proper absorbent prior to leaving the scene of the wreck. 
(g)  All wrecker service vehicles being operated in the city shall have a currently valid state emergency light permitted decal placed in a position on the windshield of each vehicle as specified by the state department of public safety. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-503) 
Sec. 32-71. - Records. 
Wrecker services shall maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for non-consensual towing and storage services. The list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle identification number, license plate number, name of owner, and the purpose for removing and/or storing the vehicle. Each wrecker service shall submit a copy of the list to the city manager or designee on a weekly basis. The records shall be retained for a period of 180 days, and shall be made available to the city manager or designee at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-504) 
Sec. 32-72. - Rates to be posted. 
All towing and storage service rates charged by wrecker services shall be posted in a conspicuous and prominent location at each business location of the wrecker service. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-505) 
Sec. 32-73. - Insurance. 
(a)  Wrecker services shall maintain a comprehensive form of automobile and general liability insurance to cover claims for property damage and/or all claims that may arise out of or as a result of services performed by the wrecker services. Minimum coverage for insurance shall be as follows: 

 
(b)  The minimum garage keeper and storage lot liability shall be $500,000.00. 
(c)  Each wrecker service shall provide the city manager or designee with a copy of the insurance certificate evidencing coverage upon purchase or renewal of the annual city business license. The policies of insurance shall provide that the city manager shall be notified upon cancellation of the wrecker service's coverage. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-506) 
Sec. 32-74. - Business standards. 
(a)  The business office and storage lot must be located within the corporate limits of the city or within a five-mile radius thereof and shall have a current city business license for wrecker service operations. Those businesses outside the city limits must have a current license or a county license in which a regulatory application and fee can be assessed in order to have record of wrecker operation of nonconsensual towing within city limits. 
(b)  Each business location shall be separately platted and filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Wrecker services only can be listed on the police department rotating call lists and only under the name as registered on the business license. 
(d)  Only businesses directly operating wrecker service vehicles are eligible for the police rotating call lists. Businesses that subcontract for wrecker towing services are not eligible. 
(e)  This article shall apply to non-consensual towing only. Any vehicle's owner making a request for his preference wrecker service is not to be governed by the rules outlined in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-507) 
Sec. 32-75. - Communications and availability standards. 
(a)  Wrecker services shall be required to be available via listed phone numbers 24 hours a day, seven days a week with adequate manpower to respond to calls immediately. No pagers or answering machines shall be allowed. 
(b)  Wrecker services shall respond to the call within a maximum of 20 minutes for standard duty and within a maximum of 15 minutes for heavy duty. 
(c)  Wrecker services must have a phone number not used by any other wrecker service and a wrecker titled to the business or business owner. 
(d)  When a wrecker service is unavailable for calls for an extended period, the wrecker service operator shall inform the city manager or designee of the period of time during which said service is unavailable and the following procedure applies: 
(1)  The name of the wrecker service will be skipped on the list during the period of nonavailability. The wrecker service operator shall be responsible for notifying the city manager or designee of a return to status availability. 
(2)  A wrecker service on either rotating call lists that has been called by the department and canceled will receive the next rotating call. 
(e)  A wrecker service that fails to respond as required herein, or to answer a telephone call seven rings from the department will lose his turn on the list. 
(f)  It shall be deemed an offense under this section if a wrecker service accepts a call for service from the city manager or designee but fails to arrive on the scene 15 minutes beyond the maximum response time. Response time shall be measured from the time the wrecker service operator accepts the call for service from the city manager or designee. 
(g)  In any 12-month period, if a wrecker service is found to be in noncompliance with the response time standards, the wrecker service operator shall be notified by city manager or designee and provided with written notice of such noncompliance and removed from the appropriate call lists according to the following schedule: 
(1)  First offense: two rotations of list; 
(2)  Second offense: five rotations of list; 
(3)  Third offense: ten rotations of list; 
(4)  Fourth offense: 15 rotations of list. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-508) 
Sec. 32-76. - Storage standards. 
(a)  All vehicles shall be towed to the wrecker service storage yard, unless otherwise directed by the vehicle owner or police officer on the scene. The storage yard must comply with the city land development ordinances or such ordinance of the county for the businesses outside the city limits. 
(b)  Wrecker service storage yards must be within the corporate limits of the city or a five-mile radius thereof, be clearly marked and easily accessible and cannot be shared or sublet to anyone at anytime. 
(c)  Wrecker services shall provide adequate security for all vehicles they place in storage and shall be held responsible for all such vehicles and contents thereof. 
(d)  All vehicles are to be secured and locked inside a locked garage or fenced lot A qualified storage lot must have a six-foot chainlink fence or its equivalent. Access gates must be locked at all time when unattended. 
(e)  Storage lots shall be of sufficient lighting so that surface of lot is illuminated to the intensity of at least two footcandles. 
(f)  Storage lots shall be paved or graveled to the same depth surface as required by the city or county for similar lots. 
(g)  Fences must be fabric of sufficient quantity to obscure the view of the lot contents and must comply with the city land regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-509) 
Sec. 32-77. - Equipment standards. 
(a)  Wrecker service vehicles of all types shall be commercially manufactured, have an adequate chassis and be in safe operating condition at all times and as provided by the laws of the state. The contractor shall have in full operation/towing condition at all times a minimum of one flatbed, one light-duty wrecker, and one medium-duty wrecker up to 26,000 GVW. The equipment/vehicle must be on the property of the wrecker contractor located within the city. 
(b)  The city manager or designee shall make an annual inspection of all wrecker service vehicles operating under this article. Unscheduled inspections may be performed as authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Wrecker services shall be properly registered and in good standing with the appropriate state agency governing vehicles for hire, and shall possess the motor carrier of property permit issued by the same agency. 
(d)  All wrecker service vehicles shall have a current cab card and stamp issued by the state department of motor vehicle safety. 
(e)  All wrecker service vehicles shall have the department of transportation (DOT) authority numbers painted or permanently affixed as required by the DOT and the documents pertaining to and authorizing such authorization shall be maintained by the wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 9, ?-??-1988; Ord. of 3-14-2002, § 18-510; Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-510) 
Sec. 32-78. - Police call list; qualifications; procedures; emergencies. 
(a)  Qualifications. Operators of wrecker services desiring to be placed on the police call list shall adhere to the qualification standards as set forth in section 32-68 and must also be approved by the public safety committee. There shall be no more than three companies on the rotation listing at any one time. 
(1)  Standard duty call list. In the event of an opening on the rotation list each qualified wrecker service can enroll and be placed upon the list. Qualifications for standard duty wreckers are as follows: the term "standard duty wrecker" means wrecker with at least 10,000 pound minimum GVW rating equipped with an 8,000-pound PTO-driven mechanically power winch, crane and boom and/or flat bed rollback having dual wheels or of equal capabilities. For purposes of towing, a standard duty wrecker shall be capable of towing cars, light trucks and similar size vehicles. 
(2)  Heavy duty equipment. Qualifications for heavy duty wreckers are as follows: The term "heavy duty wrecker" means a wrecker with at least 25,000-pound minimum GVW rating equipped with a 16-ton or larger PTO mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels or of equal or greater capabilities. The wrecker service shall have the equipment capable of moving all types of vehicles including large trucks, buses, and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers. In the event that any of the three listed wrecker services is not equipped to complete an incident or task, a wrecker service may be contacted that is not on the list for that specific incident. 
(b)  Wrecker service request procedure. All requests for wrecker service by police personnel shall be made to the Walton County E911 communication center. The city manager or designee shall maintain the rotating call lists as authorized. The dispatcher shall make calls for wrecker services on a rotation basis from the appropriate call list except when a specific service is requested. The city manager or designee shall enter the call on the proper log. 
(c)  Emergencies. In case of emergency (i.e., trapped person or major intersection blocked) the nearest qualified wrecker will be called along with the city rescue unit. Emergency status shall be determined only by the rescue unit fireman on the scene. The wrecker service to be called shall be determined by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-511) 
Sec. 32-79. - Fees for wrecker services. 
Each wrecker service shall determine the fees it will charge for the services provided and conspicuously post the schedule of charges at its office and storage lot. The city manager or designee shall be provided a copy of the current schedule of fees charged by any wrecker service. Any change in the schedule of fees shall not be effective until city manager or designee has been provided a copy of the change in fees for at least 30 days. All fees charged shall be reasonable and customary. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-512) 
Sec. 32-80. - City vehicles. 
All tows/vehicle assistance for the city will be as follows: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles will be at no charge excluding that of fire trucks. 
(2)  All other city vehicles will be pulled at half of the established rate depending upon the type of vehicle. 
(3)  City vehicles will be exempt from mileage fee for tows within the city limits. 
(4)  The mileage fee for city vehicles towed outside of the city limits shall be at half of the established rate set forth upon the posted list of fees as of January 1, 2006. 
(5)  Fire trucks will be towed at half of the established rate as of January 1, 2006, for tows whether inside or outside the city limits. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-513) 
Sec. 32-81. - Inventory reports. 
Wrecker services shall be required to keep inventory reports as follows: 
(1)  All personal items left in vehicles stored on forms, the format of which has been previously approved by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  On file for 30 days, with a duplicate copy to be filed with the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 8-10-2006, § 18-515) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pipe, hose, fire hydrant, water line, water main, valve, pressure regulator and water meter mean only those devices owned by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 11-116) 
Secs. 34-2—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-21. - Rate schedule. 
Water rates, sewer rates, water tap fees, sewer tap fees, capital recovery fees, and administrative fees pertaining to water and/or sewer shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 11-101; Ord. of 8-12-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 34-22. - Application for service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall, and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit in the amount established by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 11-102; Ord. of 7-6-1996) 
Sec. 34-23. - Connection to system; required fees. 
(a)  All existing residences, businesses and industries within 200 feet of the sewer service, which have indoor plumbing facilities shall within 60 days after service is available connect and use the sewer services of the city. 
Existing lots are those (residential or commercial) that as of May 1, 1985 have access of the water and sewer system. 
(b)  All new construction within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to connect to the water and sewer systems and shall be required to pay connection fees and/or deposits prior to the issuance of any building permits. Persons connecting to the sewer system shall be required to pay connection fees and/or deposits prior to the issuance of any building permits. On new construction, billing for use of the water system shall begin when the installation of the meter has been made. On new construction, billing for use of the sewer system shall begin 60 days after installation of the meter or upon use of the system, whichever event shall first occur. 
(c)  All new construction within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to connect to the water and sewer system and shall be required to pay any applicable tap fees, capital recovery fees, and administrative fees. On new construction, billing for use of the water system shall begin when the installation of the meter has been made. On new construction, billing for use of the sewer system shall begin 60 days after installation of the meter or upon use of the system, whichever shall first occur. 
(Code 1994, § 11-103; Ord. of 8-12-2004, § 2; Ord. of 2-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 34-24. - Minimum charge. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection; the city shall not under any condition furnish water or sewer free of charge to anyone. The minimum charge will be applied to all customers for each account when water and sewer services are shown availability to connect to the customer's property. 
(Code 1994, § 11-104; Ord. of 2-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 34-25. - Responsibility and liability—City. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The basic connection fee shall be for a service line not exceeding 80 feet. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extension of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's line or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connection or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(f)  The city shall run a sewer service line from its collection line to the property line where the collection line exists and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The basic connection fee shall be for a service line not exceeding 80 feet. 
(g)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its collection lines as may be required to render such service. 
(Code 1994, § 11-105) 
Sec. 34-26. - Same—Consumer. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household, and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the city's personnel. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system, by any piping permanent or temporary. 
(f)  Sanitary sewer service furnished by the city shall be for wastewater generated only by the city water system. No wastewater from private wells, storm drains, roof drains or similar sources shall be discharged into the system. 
(g)  The consumer's sewer piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained at the consumer's expense. All contractors or plumbers installing water or sewer system service lines shall be registered at city hall and licensed by the city. All such connections and service line work shall be done in accordance with city specifications, and all work shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to the piping being covered with earth. 
(h)  Each premises unit shall have a separate and distinct water and sewer service connection and meter. 
(Code 1994, § 11-106; Ord. of 10-6-2014(3)) 
Sec. 34-27. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing the city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system, outside of existing rights-of-way shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1994, § 11-107) 
Sec. 34-28. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1994, § 11-108) 
Sec. 34-29. - Billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account, the term "due date" means the first day of each month. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 20 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the council is made, and a service charge in the amount established by the city paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Code 1994, § 11-109) 
Sec. 34-30. - Security deposit; discontinuing service. 
(a)  Refund of deposit. When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Security deposit to be applied to account balance. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  Grounds for discontinuance by city. The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1994, § 11-110) 
Sec. 34-31. - Complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee in the amount established by the city; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1994, § 11-111) 
Sec. 34-32. - Fire hydrant water use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of this section is to protect the use of water from fire hydrants in the city. 
(b)  Inspections of tanks. All tanker trucks and sprayer trucks and all other containers which shall be filled with water through use of a fire hydrant meter must be inspected for the approved air gap or backflow preventer prior to the issuance of a fire hydrant permit. Appointments for an inspection can be made by calling city hall. 
(c)  Inspection cost for tank/tanker trucks and other containers. A fee in the amount established by the city is required. 
(d)  Deposits. A deposit in the amount established by the city shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. 
(e)  Permit fee. There will be a permit fee in the amount established by the city. 
(f)  Water usage fee. Fee for water usage shall be charged on current commercial rates. 
(g)  General construction uses. Hoses connected to a fire hydrant shall include the use of an approved double check valve assembly. 
(h)  Swimming pool. Hoses connected to fire hydrants shall not be submerged in any swimming pools during the filling process. A minimum air gap equal to two times the diameter of the hose must be used. 
(i)  Liabilities of permit holder. The permit holder assumes all liability for any and all damages to private property and/or repairs to water system facilities and appurtenance arising out of action taken by the permit holder to obtain water from the fire hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be operated in such manner as to minimize flow velocities within the water main. All costs incurred in repairing water system facilities and appurtenances or in correcting the system's water pressure arising from improper operations of the fire hydrant shall be borne by the permit holder. 
(Code 1994, § 11-112; Ord. of 3-14-1996) 
Sec. 34-33. - Preventing access to valves prohibited. 
No person shall remove or cover a water valve box with dirt or other material so that the cover or top of the valve box is not visible or direct access to the valve is denied to the city's personnel. 
(Code 1994, § 11-113) 
Sec. 34-34. - Damage of any part of water system prohibited. 
No person shall damage, destroy, deface, impair the function of, or otherwise vandalize any portion of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1994, § 11-115) 
State Law reference— Damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 34-35. - Miscellaneous prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any consumer, person, firm or entity without the authorization of the city manager or designee to do any of the following: 
(1)  Connect onto a water line of the city; 
(2)  Disconnect a water line from a water line of the city; 
(3)  Connect onto a water meter of the city; 
(4)  Disconnect a water meter of the city; 
(5)  Move, remove, change or alter the location of a water meter of the city; 
(6)  Change, alter, or damage any water meter or water line of the city for any reason including, but not limited to, preventing proper registration of water passing through said water meter or line; 
(7)  Prevent any other person or entity from obtaining water from the city; 
(8)  Obstruct or otherwise interfere with the reading or maintenance of any water meter of the city; 
(9)  Connect onto, obstruct or otherwise interfere with any property, water line, fire hydrant, pumping station or any appurtenances to water facilities of the city; 
(10)  Create a hazardous or unsafe condition to the water facilities of the city; 
(11)  Remove or alter any lock on any meter of the city; 
(12)  Make use of pipelines, meters or other property of the city; 
(13)  Use water without the authorization of the city or without payment for the same; and 
(14)  Obtain water or any product or service from the city. 
(b)  In the event of any violation of any provision of subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or designee is authorized to take any or all of the following steps: 
(1)  Disconnect any unauthorized line or meter; 
(2)  Refer the matter for theft or other violations of criminal laws of the state; 
(3)  Seek reimbursement for all damages and losses suffered by the city due to such violation, for all time expended by employees of the city in connection with the investigation of any violation of this policy, and for any damages to any pipelines, fixtures, meters or other property of the city and/or Walton County caused by such violation, the amount to be paid to the city under this subsection (b)(3) shall be not less than $500.00 and/or prosecution for criminal charges; 
(4)  Obtain sufficient payment to the city from the offender; 
(5)  Require the offender to pay all necessary sums to the city before the offender may receive water or other services from the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2005, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 34-36—34-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES 

Sec. 34-59. - Required. 
Any person or corporation who ties onto the water or sewer system shall pay a capital recovery fee in the manner and amount established by this division. In all cases, the capital recovery fee must be paid prior to authorization of connection to the water or sewer system in the form of an approved tap agreement. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.1.1) 
Sec. 34-60. - Total of fees required. 
The total for connection to the water or sewer system shall be the sum of the capital recovery fee, plus the connection fee, which is set by the city council to cover the cost of materials, labor and related costs of the sewer tap. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.1.2) 
Sec. 34-61. - Computation. 
The capital recovery fee assessment shall be in accordance with the fee schedule established by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.2) 
Sec. 34-62. - Individual fee determination. 
(a)  Petition allowed. An applicant for development approval may petition the city for an individual fee determination of capital recovery fees due for a project. 
(b)  Individual fee calculation study. An applicant electing an individual fee determination shall submit an individual fee calculation study for the development activity for which service is sought. The individual fee calculation study shall follow the methodology and format of the Sewer Capital Recovery Fee And Rate Differential Study or, subject to prior approval of the city, such other professionally accepted methodology that identifies a project's proportionate share. The applicant shall attend a pre-application meeting with the city, and no agreement or understanding in regard to data assumptions or methodology shall be binding upon the city unless specifically agreed to by the city in writing. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the individual fee calculation was made. 
(c)  Determination time frame. The city shall provide the applicant with the individual fee determination within 30 days after presentation of the individual fee calculation study. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.3) 
Sec. 34-63. - Application process. 
Upon application to the city, any person may apply for and shall receive a certification of the capital recovery fee schedule or a certification of an individual fee determination. 
(1)  Application format. Applications shall include the following information and items: 
a.  A full and complete description of the project; 
b.  A full and complete description of the existing, or proposed, land use and development activity; 
c.  A statement as to whether the applicant seeks a certification of the capital recovery fee schedule or a certification of an individual fee determination; 
d.  If the applicant seeks a certification of an individual fee determination, an individual fee calculation study complying with the requirements of section 34-62(b) shall be included. 
(2)  Timely provision of fee schedule. The city shall provide an applicant with a capital recovery fee schedule within ten working days after receipt of a completed application. The fee schedule certified by the city shall establish the capital recovery fee schedule for the proposed development activity based upon the number of approved permits for each development. 
(3)  Certification of individual fee determination. 
a.  The city shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within 30 days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the city shall establish the capital recovery fee for the proposed development. 
b.  Notwithstanding the issuance of any such certification, any changes in or additions to the proposed development activity different form the development activity identified in the original application shall be subject to increased or additional capital recovery fees to the extent that such changes or additions would have resulted in the determination of a different fee from that assessed from the original application. The additional capital recovery fees shall be based upon the capital recovery fee schedule in effect at the time of any such change or addition. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.4) 
Sec. 34-64. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  Payment required prior to water and sewer tap agreement. Any persons required to pay capital recovery fees pursuant to this division shall pay such fees to the city prior to the issuance of an approved water or sewer tap agreement. 
(b)  Additional payment required due to alteration or expansion. Any persons who engage in an alteration or expansion of an existing building or use of land already on the water and sewer system which results in an additional water and sewage demand will be required to pay additional assessed capital recovery fees prior to the issuance of a building permit by the city. 
(c)  Fees to be deposited into trust fund. All funds collected pursuant to this division shall be properly identified by the city capital recovery fee service area are to be promptly transferred for deposit into the capital recovery fee trust fund to be held in accounts as provided for in section 34-70. Funds shall be used solely for the purposes specified in this division. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.5) 
Sec. 34-65. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Funds to be used for system improvements. Funds collected as capital recovery fees shall be used for system improvements. No funds shall be used for any purpose not in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-8. Capital recovery fees shall be used exclusively for system improvements in the city's service area. 
(b)  Annual report required. Each fiscal year, the city's city manager shall present to the council an annual report describing the amount of capital recovery fees collected, encumbered and used during the preceding year. Moneys, including any accrued interest, not encumbered in any fiscal year shall be retained in the same capital recovery fee trust fund until the next fiscal year except as provided in section 34-68. 
(c)  Administrative fee. The city shall be entitled to retain up to three percent of all capital recovery fees it collects as an administrative fee to offset the costs of administering this division. 
(d)  Fees may be used for debt service. Capital recovery fees may be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance system improvements. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.6) 
Sec. 34-66. - Credits. 
(a)  Project improvements. No credit shall be given for project improvements. 
(b)  System improvements. Credit shall be given for the present value of the construction of improvements or contribution or dedication of land or money by a developer or his predecessor in title for system improvements accepted by the city in accordance with a private development agreement. 
(c)  Procedure for claiming credit. A person claiming credits under a private development agreement shall submit to the city a project description in sufficient detail to allow the city to prepare an engineering and construction cost estimate. A person proposing credit for system improvements shall present cost estimates and property appraisals prepared by duly licensed and qualified professionals to be used by the city in determining the amount of the credit. All construction must be carried out in accordance with applicable city, county, or state development and design standards. A person seeking credits under a private development agreement for land dedication shall present the city with property appraisals prepared by qualified professionals and a certified copy of the most recent assessment of the property for tax purposes. However, the city retains the right to determine the amount to be credited by preparing engineering and construction cost estimates and/or property appraisals for those improvements. 
(d)  Timing of claim. Credits must be claimed at the time of the application for sewer service. Any credit not so claimed shall not be available as to any capital recovery fee owed with respect to water and sewer service to that particular property. 
(e)  Excess credits. In the event that a developer contracts with the city to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements so that the amount of the credit created by such construction, funding or contribution is in excess of a particular capital recovery fee which would have been otherwise due and owing, the developer shall be reimbursed for such excess contribution, funding, or contribution from the pool of capital recovery fees paid by the development projects located in the service area which benefit by such improvements. 
(f)  Credit certificate. Credits shall be represented by a written credit certificate setting forth the name of the person or entity to whom the credit certificate is issued, the number of the credit certificate, and the amount of the credit. The city shall also maintain a register (the "credit certificate register") which shall set forth the name of the credit holder, the number of the credit certificate, and the amount of the credit. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.7) 
Sec. 34-67. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exempt development types. The following shall be exempted from the payment of capital recovery fees: 
(1)  Alteration or expansion of an existing building or use of land where no additional living units are created, where the use is not changed, and where the city manager or designee determines that no additional demand will result. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not result in additional demand as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(3)  The replacement of a building or structure that was in place on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division, or the replacement of a building or structure that was constructed subsequent thereto and for which the correct capital recovery fee had been paid or otherwise provided for, with a new building or structure of the same use, provided that no additional demand will result as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Documentation required for exemption. A person claiming exemptions pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall submit to the city manager or designee information and documentation sufficient to permit the city to determine whether such exemption claimed is proper, and, if so, the extent of such exemption. 
(c)  Timing for exemption application. Exemptions must be applied for at the time of the application for a building permit except in the case of a private development agreement. Any exemptions not so applied for shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.8) 
Sec. 34-68. - Refunds. 
Refunds of capital recovery fees shall be made only in the following instances and in the following manner: 
(1)  Capacity available but service denied. Upon application to the city by the fee payer, the city shall refund 97 percent of the capital recovery fee if capacity is available and service is denied. The city shall retain three percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. 
(2)  Failure to encumber or expend fee when service is not available. 
a.  Upon application to the city by the fee payer, the city shall refund 97 percent of the capital recovery fee paid and not expended or encumbered if the city, after collecting the fee when service is not available, has failed to encumber the fee or commence construction within six years from the date the capital recovery fee was paid. The city shall retain three percent of the fee paid as an administrative fee. In determining whether capital recovery fees have been expended or encumbered, fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
b.  When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber capital recovery fees, the city shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the fee payer who paid the capital recovery fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a fee payer's successor in interest who has given the city notice of the transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided the city a mailing address. The city shall also publish such notice within 30 days of the expiration of the six-year period after the date the capital recovery fee was paid. The published notice shall contain the heading "Notice of Entitlement to Capital Recovery Fee Refund." 
(3)  Refund application due within one year. A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the city to determine whether the refund claimed is proper, and if so, the amount of such refund, becomes payable under subsections (1) and (2) of this section or within one year from the date of publication of the notice of entitlement of a refund under subsection (2) of this section, whichever is later. Any refund not applied for within said time period shall be deemed waived. 
(4)  Refund documentation required. A refund application shall include information and documentation sufficient to permit the city to determine whether the refund claimed is proper, and if so, the amount of such refund. 
(5)  Accrued interest to be applied. A refund shall include a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess capital recovery fee paid. 
(6)  Time period for refunds. All refunds shall be paid within 60 days after the city determines that such refund is due. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.9) 
Sec. 34-69. - Capital recovery fee service area established. 
The water and sewer system service area consists of an area within the city limits of the city. The service area is expected to expand in the future to include any and all additional area served by the water and wastewater system, with no separate service areas anticipated to be established. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.10) 
Sec. 34-70. - Trust fund established. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a water and wastewater capital recovery fee trust fund. 
(b)  Funds shall be interest bearing. Capital recovery fees shall be deposited and maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts. Interest earned on capital recovery fees shall be funds of the account on which it is earned and subject to all restrictions imposed by section 34-65. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.11) 
Sec. 34-71. - Review of fee structure. 
The capital recovery fee structure shall be reviewed by the city council annually. The failure to review such structure shall not invalidate this division. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.12) 
Sec. 34-72. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Appealable items. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city with respect to any of the following determinations shall have the right to appeal to the city council: 
(1)  The imposition of a capital recovery fee; 
(2)  The amount of a capital recovery fee; 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits to a capital recovery fee; 
(4)  The entitlement to an exemption from a capital recovery fee; and 
(5)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of a capital recovery fee. 
(b)  Prior to any appeal to the city council, the aggrieved party shall file a request for reconsideration with the city, who shall act upon the request within 30 days. 
(c)  Timetable for hearing appeals. All appeals shall be taken within 30 days of the city's decision on the request for reconsideration by filing with the city a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The city council shall establish a date and time for a hearing on the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable period of time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city council may take an appeal to the Superior Court of Walton County within 30 days after the decision of the city is rendered. 
(d)  Payment under protest. A person may pay a capital recovery fee under protest to obtain an approved water and sewer tap agreement, and by making such payment shall not be stopped from exercising the right of appeal provided in this section or receiving a refund of any amount as a result of such appeal. 
(Ord. of 6-19-2003, § 4.13) 
Secs. 34-73—34-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-88. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(2)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(3)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(4)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(5)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(6)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(7)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(8)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(9)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale or installation; 
(10)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(11)  Installation, maintenance or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(12)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010(2)) 
Sec. 34-89. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this division. 
(b)  The department of utilities shall be the enforcement authority for this division. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this division may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010(2)) 
Sec. 34-90. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this division derives shall go into effect 30 days after adopting or no later than January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010(2)) 
Secs. 34-91—34-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Appendix B of of an ordinance adopted May 13, 2010(1), amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 34-103—34-108 was entitled "Backflow Prevention", and derived from: Ord of Nov. 30, 1995, § I—VI. 

Sec. 34-102. - Cross connection control; general policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Loganville from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the consumer's internal distribution system(s) or the consumer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems; and 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(b)  Responsibility. The Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water (391-3-5.-13.2) require that a supplier of water or any person having possession or control of facilities, which may cause that contamination of a public water system, has the responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources or any contaminants from entering the public water system. The director of utilities shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgement of said director of utilities, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the consumer's water service connection; or, within the consumer's private water system for the safety of the water system, the director of utilities or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to said consumer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific location(s) on his premises. The consumer shall immediately install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at the consumer's own expense; and, failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintained said assembly(s), shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. 5-13-2010(1), App. B) 
Sec. 34-103. - Definitions. 
Air gap. The term "air gap" shall mean a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. An "approved air gap" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch (103.54 cm). 
Approved. 
(1)  The term "approved" as herein used in reference to a water supply shall mean a water supply that has been approved by the health agency having jurisdiction. 
(2)  The term "approved" as herein used in reference to an air gap, double check valve assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean an approval by the administrative authority having jurisdiction. 
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These natural waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow. The term "backflow" shall mean the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source or sources. See: "Backsiphonage" and "Backpressure." 
Backflow preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. 
Backpressure. The term "backpressure" shall mean any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
Backsiphonage. The term "backsiphonage" shall mean a form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure, which causes subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
Contamination. The term "contamination" shall mean an impairment of the quality of the water, which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc. 
Cross connection. The term "cross connection" shall mean any unprotected, actual or potential, connection or structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may cause are considered to be cross connections. 
(1)  The term "direct cross connection" shall mean a cross connection which is subject to both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(2)  The term "indirect cross connection" shall mean a cross connection which is subject to backsiphonage only. 
Cross connection control by containment. The term "service protection" shall mean the appropriate type or method of backflow protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer's potable water system. 
Cross connections, controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Director of utilities. The director of utilities, in charge of the Water Department of the City of Loganville, is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly. The term "double check valve backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant). 
Hazard, degree of. The term "degree of hazard" shall mean either a pollutional (nonhealth) or contamination (health) hazard and is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system. 
Hazard, health. The term "health hazard" shall mean an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
Hazard, plumbing. The term "plumbing hazard" shall mean an internal or plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, cross connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross connections can be located in many types of structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or industrial establishments. Such a connection, if permitted to exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention assembly. 
Hazard, pollutional. The term "pollutional hazard" shall mean an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtances. 
Hazard, system. The term "system hazard" shall mean an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial fluids. The term "industrial fluids" shall mean any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This includes, but is not limited to: Polluted or contaminated used waters; all types of process waters and "used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemical in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation to canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for fire fighting purposes. 
Pollution. The term "pollution" shall mean an impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The term "reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing, resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a nonhealth (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant). This assembly shall not be used for backflow protection of sewage or reclaimed water. 
Water, potable. The term "potable water" shall mean any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved by the health agency. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the health agency has final judgement as to its safety and potability. 
Water, nonpotable. The term "nonpotable water" shall mean a water supply which has not been approved for human consumption by the health agency having jurisdiction. 
Water, service connection. The term "service connection" shall mean the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, (i.e., where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the water meter. 
Water, used. The term "used water" shall mean any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor. 
See also Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, 391-3-5.13(4); Manual of Cross Connection Control, 9th edition, University of Southern California, 1993; Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control, American Water Works Association Manual of Water Supply Practices, Manual 14, 3rd; edition, 2004; Cross Connection Control Manual, United States Environmental Protection Agency, June 1989. 
(Ord. 5-13-2010(1), App. B) 
Sec. 34-104. - Requirements. 
Water system. 
(1)  The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: The water purveyor's system and the consumer's system. Water purveyor's system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the purveyor, up to the point where the consumer's system begins. 
(2)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(3)  The distribution system shall include the network of pipes and conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the consumer's system. 
(4)  The consumer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the water purveyor's distribution system, which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use. 
(Ord. 5-13-2010(1), App. B) 
Sec. 34-105. - Policy. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by Georgia Environmental Protection Division laws and regulations, the State of Georgia Plumbing Code and the ordinance from which this article derives for the control of backflow and cross connections. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system and is to be located immediately downstream of the water meter or as close as physically feasible to the water meter. The type device is commensurate to the degree of hazard, which is determined by the director of utilities or his designee. Any installation other than that specified in this section shall be approved by the director of utilities or his designee. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article for the control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(b)  The consumer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City of Loganville Water Department to determine whether unprotected cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director of utilities shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the consumer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the State of Georgia Statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(c)  An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system immediately downstream of the water meter or as close as physically feasible to the water meter; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the director of utilities, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the water purveyor's system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having: (1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against; or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
(d)  The type of protective assembly required under subsections (c)(1)—(3) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (c)(1) of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are unprotected cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises. 
(e)  Approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(1)  Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a make, model and size approved by the director of utilities. The term "approved backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: 
AWWA/ANSI C510-89 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies; 
AWWA/ANSI C511-89 Standard for Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies; 
and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (USC FCCCHR) established in: 
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies—Section 10 of the most current edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control. 
(2)  The Georgia EPD and the City of Loganville have adopted said AWWA and USC FCCCHR standards and specification. A "certificate of approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCCHR specifications shall evidence final approval. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Georgia EPD and the City of Loganville to test and approve backflow prevention assemblies: 
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research  University of Southern California  KAP-200 University Park MC-2531  Los Angeles, California 90089-2531 
(3)  Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed will be added to an approved list as the Georgia EPD and the City of Loganville qualify them. 
(4)  Backflow preventers, which may be subjected to backpressure or back siphonage, that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow prevention assemblies may be used without further test or qualification. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation, after any repairs and at least once per year. In those instances where the director of utilities deems the hazard to be great enough he may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by a certified tester listed on the City of Loganville Certified Backflow Prevention Testers List. It shall be the duty of the director of utilities or his designee to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the consumer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. All repairs, overhauls or replacements shall be performed by a licensed plumber in the State of Georgia. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and a copy shall be sent to the director of utilities or his designee. 
(g)  All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements under subsection (e) of this section, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the director of utilities or his designee is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the water purveyor's system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than the minimum maintenance or when the director of utilities finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 5-13-2010(1), App. B) 
Secs. 34-106—34-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISCHARGES FROM HOLDING TANKS 

Sec. 34-130. - Limitations on discharges into city system. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity to place, empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening into the city wastewater system, or any system connected with and discharging into the city wastewater system, the contents of any holding tank, including septic tank wastes, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material, except as provided in section 34-131. 
(Code 1994, § 12-101) 
Sec. 34-131. - Permit required. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to issue permits to discharge the contents of holding tanks and septic tanks, from domestic sources only, at locations specified by the city upon application to the city on a form provided by the city. The permit shall stipulate the locations and times for which the permittee will be allowed to discharge septic tank wastes and to whom each load must be reported and what information (e.g., the source of the load) must be provided by the permittee when reporting. (See annex A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.) 
(Code 1994, § 12-102) 
Sec. 34-132. - Charges. 
A charge as established by the city shall be made for the privilege of discharging the contents of holding tanks and septic tanks into the city wastewater sewer system. 
(Code 1994, § 12-103) 
Sec. 34-133. - Manifest form required. 
All holding tank and septic tank waste haulers shall be required to complete a manifest form provided by the city regarding the quantity, nature and source of the waste being deposited in the city wastewater system. 
(Code 1994, § 12-104) 
Sec. 34-134. - Equipment standards. 
All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps and hoses used in the collection and/or transportation of the contents of holding tank and septic tank waste shall be modern equipment in good repair. 
(Code 1994, § 12-105) 
Sec. 34-135. - Revocation of permits and other penalties. 
Permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the city, continued dumping of such matter into the city wastewater system will be injurious to the system or treatment processes. Permits may be suspended or revoked for willful, continued or persistent violations of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 12-106) 
Sec. 34-136. - Grease trap contents. 
Discharge of grease trap contents into the city wastewater system is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 12-107) 
Secs. 34-137—34-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GREASE TRAPS AND SAND/OIL INTERCEPTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Article V, formerly entitled "Grease Traps" was amended by an ordinance adopted April 14, 2010, in which divs. 1 and 2 were added to include the provisions for sand and oil interceptors, as set out herein. 

DIVISION 1. - GREASE TRAPS 

Sec. 34-156. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified pumper/waste haulers/haulers means any company qualified by the city's inspector to pump grease traps. 
Commercial wastewater means: 
(1)  Wastewater generated through the production, preparation and/or the serving of food, not including residential food preparation. 
(2)  Wastewater generated by any other processes not defined as industrial waste. This does not include domestic sewage. 
Food means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food processing establishment means a commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a food service establishment, retail food store, or commissary. 
Food sales establishment means retail and wholesale grocery stores; retail seafood stores; food processing plants; bakeries; confectioneries; fruit, nuts and vegetable stores; and places of business and similar establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for consumption off-premises. 
Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes: Restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short-order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean a "food sales establishments," as defined in this section which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on the premises. 
Grease means rendered animal fat, vegetable shortening and other such oily matter used for the purposes of and resulting from cooking and/or preparing foods. 
Grease trap means a device designed to separate and retain fats, oils, and grease from liquid waste and permit the liquid waste to discharge into the sewer system. 
Ground garbage means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Inedible oil/grease (recyclable cooking oil/grease) means all greases and oils used in deep fryers which must be disposed of properly by rendering companies. 
Mobile food unit means a self-propelled vehicle or mounted unit intended to be used as a food service establishment and is not regulated by this article. 
New construction/renovation means any type of construction that requires a building, electrical, plumbing, and/or HVAC permit from the city. 
Nuisance means a use of property or course of conduct that interferes with the legal rights of others by causing damage, annoyance or inconvenience. 
Permit means written authorization granted by the city manager or designee to the owner or authorized agent to operate a food service establishment and indicates satisfactory compliance with this article. All food service waste discharge permits are nontransferable. 
Rendering companies means companies that contract to pick up inedible grease. 
Renovations means any renovations done on an existing establishment which shall initiate an upgrade to the existing grease disposal system to present standards. 
Subcontractor means a subcontractor hired by the city to pump a noncompliant user's wastewater system, at the user's expense. 
Surcharge means any charge added above and beyond the fines already levied by the city. 
Temporary food service establishment means a food service establishment which operates at the same location for a period of time of not more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event, such as a fair, carnival, circus, exhibition or similar temporary gathering and is not regulated by this article. 
User means any residential, commercial, or industrial customer connected to the city water/sewer system. 
Waste oil canister means an environmental services approved canister used to store inedible grease until picked up by grease hauler. Canister must be clearly marked "Inedible Grease." 
Wastewater inspector means an individual or person appointed by the city manager or designee to oversee grease trap inspections and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2002, § II) 
Sec. 34-157. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Pollution control required for city system. The city finds that in order to provide for the public health and welfare, and to comply with existing ordinances, laws and regulations of the state and the United States Government, it is necessary to set uniform requirements for all users of the water pollution control facilities (WPCF) of the city to establish effluent limits; to require minimum frequencies of inspections, to require pretreatment where necessary by system users; to regulate the use of municipal pollution control facilities through the issuance of permits to certain commercial/industrial users; to establish charges and fees for the equitable distribution of costs; and to authorize monitoring and enforcement activities. 
(b)  Preventive measures to be taken. The purpose of this grease trap article is to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will interfere with the proper operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; to prevent the introduction into the municipal pollution control facilities of pollutants which will cause the city to be in violation of any permits; to prevent the introduction into municipal pollution control facilities of toxic pollutants which would pass through the facilities in toxic amounts into receiving water or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the facilities; to prevent unauthorized discharges of pollutants into the environment; to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim the wastewaters and sludges from the facilities; and to provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal pollution control facilities. 
(c)  Criteria and methodologies required. The city finds that criteria are needed to minimize the discharge of grease and oils to the city's sewer system and that certain portions of the city require additional inspections to accommodate compliance with this article. The accumulation of grease and oils discharged into the sewer system decreases pipeline capacity and can lead to grease blockages, which in turn can cause overflows from the sewer system. The city must protect its sewer system against accumulation of grease and oils. Sources of grease and oil discharges include industrial users of the sewer system and food service establishments. Industrial users are subject to industrial user permitting and pretreatment requirements. The best method for reducing discharges of grease and oil from food service establishments is the installation of grease traps at the food service establishment and insuring proper maintenance of the grease traps by the owner or operator of the food service establishment. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2002, § I) 
Sec. 34-158. - Food-related establishment regulations—New installations. 
(a)  Permit required. For new construction after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived by the city council and after the issuance of a plumbing permit issued by the city, the owner or operator (hereinafter called the user) of a food processing establishment, food sales establishment, or food service establishment which discharges wastewater into the city's sewer system shall obtain a food service wastewater discharge permit from the city manager or designee. This permit shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any business license issued by the city. Failure to obtain the food service wastewater discharge permit shall be grounds for possible water service termination. 
(b)  Fee. There will be an annual permit fee in the amount established by the city for food service wastewater discharge permits. Said fee is to be billed annually on the occupational tax/business license. The city manager or designee will evaluate this fee annually. 
(c)  Permit conditions. Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Permit duration; 
(2)  Permit fee; 
(3)  Frequency of inspections; 
(4)  Pretreatment requirements; 
(5)  Maintenance requirements; 
(6)  Limitations on time or rate of discharge; 
(7)  Compliance schedules; 
(8)  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
(9)  Statement of permission to the city manager or designee to enter upon the user's property without prior notification for the purpose of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing; and/or 
(10)  Other conditions deemed necessary by the city manager or designee to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations. 
(d)  Grease trap requirements. All food service establishments, food sales establishments, and food processing establishments where food is manufactured, sold, or prepared, except for small areas designated as "break areas" or the equivalent, discharging wastewater containing fats, oils and grease (FOG) to the city's water pollution control facilities shall install, operate, and maintain a sufficiently sized oil and grease, water and solids separator (hereinafter called "grease trap") necessary to achieve and maintain compliance as indicated below: 
(1)  Outdoor grease traps. Outdoor grease traps requirements for new installations and renovations: 
a.  Grease traps for new food processing establishments, food sales establishments, or food service establishments shall have a capacity not less than 1,500-gallon tank. Maximum trap size shall be 2,500 gallons. See grease trap design detail for minimum requirements. 

b.  The user shall install suitable manhole structures on the discharge line to the sewer to allow for observation, sampling and measurement of the flow of wastewater. These manholes shall be installed and maintained in a safe and accessible condition at all times at the user's expense. See grease trap detail for manhole placement. 
c.  Outdoor grease traps shall have the following design features: a T-inlet, in which one T-branch extends a minimum of one foot below the liquid level, and T-outlet T with a minimum submergence of two-thirds the liquid depth, a baffle to separate the trap into two compartments and two manhole access ways for inspection of T-inlets and T-outlets. The trap shall have two two-way cleanouts, one at each end of the grease trap as close as possible to the inlets and outlets of the grease trap. Dishwasher wastewater shall be discharged to outdoor grease traps. (See Grease Trap/Manhole detail) 


d.  Trap sizing requirements: The following table shall be utilized in determining grease trap capacity (size) for the business or institution. If this table does not apply to any specific case, the city manager or designee will determine the capacity of the oil/grease removal system. 

 
e.  All accesses to grease trap must have "Grease Trap" imprinted on them. 
(2)  Indoor grease traps by exception only. The city manager or designee may approve the installation of indoor grease traps provided the establishment is not equipped with a dishwasher and/or food waste grinder. All indoor traps shall be sized and installed in accordance with the following tables I, II and III, which have been extracted from Plumbing and Drainage Standard, Testing and Rating Procedures for Grease Interceptors with Appendix of Sizing and Installation Data, 1996. 
INDOOR GREASE TRAPS 

 
  

 
  

 
(3)  Prohibited materials. The following materials are prohibited from being discharged into an indoor grease trap: 
a.  Wastewater with a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Wastewater discharge from dishwashers. 
c.  Acid or caustic trap cleaners. 
d.  Wastewater discharge from garbage disposals. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2002, § III(I); Ord. of 9-11-2003) 
Sec. 34-159. - Same—Existing installations. 
(a)  Permit required. The owner or operator (hereinafter called "the user") of a food processing establishment, food sales establishment, or food service establishment which discharges wastewater into the city's sewer system, installed before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall obtain a food service wastewater discharge permit. Failure to obtain the food service wastewater discharge permit shall be grounds for water service interruption. 
(b)  Fee. There will be an annual permit fee in the amount established by the city for a food service wastewater discharge permit. The city manager or designee will evaluate this fee annually. 
(c)  Conditions. Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Permit duration; 
b.  Permit fee; 
c.  Frequency of inspection; 
d.  Pretreatment requirements; 
e.  Maintenance requirements; 
f.  Limitations on time or rate of discharge; 
g.  Compliance schedules; 
h.  Requirements for maintenance of records and submission of reports; 
i.  Statement of permission to the city manager or designee to enter upon the user's property for the purposes of inspection, observation, photography, records examination and copying, measurement, sampling or testing; and/or 
j.  Other conditions deemed necessary by the city manager or designee to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinances, laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2002, § III(II)) 
Sec. 34-160. - Maintenance, inspection, and recordkeeping requirements; noncompliance; penalties. 
(a)  Frequency of maintenance by the owner/user. 
(1)  Frequency for outdoor grease traps. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the integrity and capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the 25 percent rule as defined in subsection (a)(1)a of this section, and at intervals of no less than once every 90 days. 
a.  The "25 percent Rule" requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of a trap is determined by measuring the internal depth from the outlet water elevation to the bottom of the trap. 
b.  The city manager or designee may, in writing or verbally, increase or decrease a user's grease trap pumping frequency on a case-by-case basis based on inspection of material build up in the grease trap (i.e., church, non-profit organization, etc.). 
(2)  Frequency for indoor grease traps. Maintenance shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the integrity and capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the 25 percent Rule as defined in subsection (a)(1)a of this section. Indoor grease traps must be cleaned at intervals no less than once every 30 days. 
(3)  Violation to introduce chemicals which dissolve fats, oils and grease. It shall be a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city's sewer line, pump station and/or treatment plant. Relocating the grease downstream in the sewer system by any means, be they biological, chemical or mechanical, is expressly forbidden. 
(4)  User responsible for removal and disposal of grease trap waste. The user shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of the grease trap waste. All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such waste. Grease trap pumpage shall not be discharged to the city's sewer system. 
a.  Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, and complete 100 percent pumping, including floatable materials, wastewater, sludges and solids. Top skimming of outdoor grease traps, decanting or back flushing of the grease trap or its wastes for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled by trap recycling truck is prohibited. Further, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids or solids into a grease trap from vehicles after servicing is prohibited. 
b.  It is specifically prohibited to maintain grease traps by bacteriological, chemical, or enzymatic addition or treatment. 
(b)  Recordkeeping requirement. 
(1)  The user shall be responsible for maintaining records (manifests) as to the dates of service, quantity of waste removed, end disposal site of waste and identification of certified pumper/waste haulers/haulers. These records shall be kept on site at the user's location for a period of three years and are subject to the city manager or designee's review without prior notification. The records shall also be submitted for annual permit renewal as required by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  The manifest shall be pre-approved by the city and must contain the following information: 
a.  For food service establishment: 
1.  Name. 
2.  Address. 
3.  Phone. 
4.  Food service establishment wastewater discharge permit number. 
5.  Trap type and size. 
6.  Authorized signature (verifying that grease trap was cleaned and in operable condition) and date of service. 
7.  Contact name. 
8.  Grease trap location (inside or outside). 
b.  For service company information (waste hauler): 
1.  Name. 
2.  Address. 
3.  Phone. 
4.  Certified pumper/waste hauler/hauler permit number. 
5.  Total gallons removed from grease trap. 
6.  Disposal method. 
7.  Authorized signature and date of service. 
c.  For disposal site. 
1.  Name. 
2.  Address. 
3.  Phone. 
4.  Facility permit (license number). 
5.  Authorized signature and date of disposal. 
(3)  Copy for the city records. Each part of the manifest will have a tracking number located in the top right corner. The user must send the final destination copy (fourth copy) to the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Frequency of inspection by the city; failure of trap; noncompliance. 
(1)  In order to achieve compliance with this article, food service establishments, food processing establishments and food sales establishments shall be inspected by the city personnel a minimum of three times per year. The city manager or designee may determine that more frequent inspections are required, based on conditions found at the time of inspection. Such inspection frequency shall be indicated on the permit. 
(2)  Inspection of a grease trap shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of grease and oils, as required by the 25 percent rule as defined in subsection (a)(1)a of this section. 
(3)  Once a grease trap fails an inspection or is found not to be in proper working order, the inspector notifies the owner that the grease trap must be cleaned out within three calendar days. After three days, the inspector will reinspect the grease trap. If the grease trap is found to be in compliance, the inspector shall schedule the next inspection within 90 days for outside grease trap and 30 days for inside grease traps. If upon re-inspection the grease trap is found to be in compliance, the inspection schedule shall revert to that time period found on the food service establishment's permit. 
(4)  Upon the re-inspection, if the grease trap is found still to be in violation, a written notice of noncompliance will be issued by the wastewater inspector and the grease trap will be pumped by the city's pumping contractor immediately at user's expense. 
(5)  Any user which receives three notices of noncompliance within a 24-month period shall be deemed a nuisance by the city manager or designee and shall require such corrections necessary to abate said nuisance. 
(6)  Any mechanically operated grease trap found in noncompliance, shall be deemed a nuisance by the city manager or designee and must be upgraded to the new installation requirements of this article. 
(7)  Discharge to the public wastewater collection system shall meet current city sewer use regulations. 
(d)  Notice of noncompliance. A notice of noncompliance will be issued to the person responsible for violating this article and/or the city's sewer use regulations, who will have 72 hours to respond. 
(e)  Failure to respond. If a person served with a notice or order to remove existing unsafe conditions from systems, appliances or equipment, or discontinue the use of same, shall have 72 hours to comply with the requirements. If not, the city manager or designee shall institute an appropriate action in the courts to compel a compliance. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this article or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished or sanctioned as provided below: 
(1)  By a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. This article provides for penalties from $500.00 up to $1,000.00. The council may modify the penalties set out and within these limits. 
(2)  An additional surcharge to the user will be issued. This surcharge will be added to the water bill in addition to fines. 
(3)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(4)  The grease trap users are subject to the enforcement provisions set forth. In addition, food processing establishment, food sales establishment or food service establishment grease trap users are subject to the following penalties for violation of this section: 
a.  First offense: Written warning. 
b.  Second offense: A fine of $500.00. 
c.  Third offense: A fine of $1,000.00, with possible water service termination. Once violation has been fixed, water service will be reinstated with possible reconnection fees applying. 
d.  If the business violates this article three times within 24 months, the permit will be revoked. 
(g)  Additional pretreatment. If additional pretreatment and/or maintenance is required to meet the provisions in this article the city manager or designee may require that food processing establishment, food sales establishment, or food service establishments in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article to upgrade to the provisions provided herein. 
(h)  Abatement. The imposition of the penalties prescribed in subsection (f) of this section shall not preclude the city from instituting an appropriate civil action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent the use of any equipment, appliance or system covered by this Code. 
(i)  Haulers. Haulers must be approved via the city manager or designee before any pumping in the city. 
(1)  Requirements for approval of hauler: 
a.  Must have four-part manifest approved by the city (with tracking number). 
b.  Must show proof of proper disposal of waste based on EPA and EPD requirements. 
c.  If trucks are used for both septic and grease trap pumping, trucks must be washed out completely before pumping septic tank and disposed of at an approved disposal site. 
(2)  Any violation of this article and these requirements may result in possible fines and/or removal from the city's approved/certified haulers list. 
a.  Fines will be equal to user fines as stated under subsection (f) of this section, pertaining to penalties. 
b.  Three violations within a 24-month period will be grounds for hauling/pumping company's license/permit revocation. The city manager or designee will determine revocation period length. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2002, § III(III)) 
Secs. 34-161—34-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SAND/OIL INTERCEPTOR REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See editors note attached to art. V. 

Sec. 34-172. - General. 
(a)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be provided when, in the judgment of the City of Loganville, they are necessary for the proper handling of sand, grit and/or petroleum-based liquid waste which may be harmful to, or cause obstruction of the publicly owned wastewater collection system, interfere with the operation of the publicly owned treatment works. The City of Loganville will substantiate whether a sand/oil interceptor is suitable for installation. On a general basis, sand/oil interceptors will be required for all affected property as described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(b)  An adequate sand/oil interceptor shall be installed, as specified herein, on the wastewater drainage system from any affected property as described in subsections (1) and (2) of this subection (b). The adequacy of the sand/oil interceptor shall be determined by compliance with the design, sizing, and other requirements of this regulation. 
(1)  Nonresidential properties on which occurs vehicle parking or storage, automotive service or repair, machine shops, and/or mechanics providing service to the general public, including but not limited to, service stations, truck stops, gasoline stations, automotive/car care centers, auto body shops, automotive dealerships, car washes, motorcycle shops, machine shops, welding shops, tractor/farm implement dealerships, truck/bus dealerships, bus barns, or any other facility that generates sand, grit and/or petroleum byproduct waste that would discharge into the wastewater collection system. 
(2)  All drains from shop areas, car wash bays washing areas and/or potential spill areas shall be connected to a sand/oil interceptor. Fixtures to be connected include, but are not limited to, floor drains, engine/parts cleaning sinks and wash areas located in areas where sand and petroleum-based liquid waste containing materials may exist. 
(3)  Toilets, urinals and similar fixtures shall not discharge waste through a sand/oil interceptor. Such fixtures shall be plumbed directly into the building sewer and waste system. 
(c)  A variance as to the requirement for a sand/oil interceptor on any nonresidential structure may be granted after due consideration by the City of Loganville for good cause shown including, without limitation, the particular hardship and unique circumstances of the customer which are not brought about as a result of the customers acts or omissions. The granting of any variance shall be at the sole discretion of the City of Loganville based upon the facts and circumstances of each request. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-173. - Definitions. 
Affected property has the meaning set forth as properties located within the city being required to obtain approval from the city for a sand/oil interceptor in order to operate business to be within compliance of these regulations. 
GOPP Grease oil permit program. 
Sand/oil interceptor shall be defined as a unit of at least 750 gallons capacity designed to retain sand/oil from one or more fixtures and which shall be located remote from the fixtures being served, typically outside the building being served. This is the preferred unit of choice by the City of Loganville. The use of larger capacity sand/oil interceptors is encouraged whenever possible in that larger interceptors work more efficiently. In resolving any question of capacity of sand/oil interceptors, any uncertainties shall be resolved in favor of the larger capacity interceptor. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-174. - Design and sizing. 
(a)  The design and sizing of a required sand/oil interceptor shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes, nor more than 30 minutes retention time at the peak eight hour flow rate. Flow-through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight hour flow rate. No sand/grit interceptor shall be smaller than 750 gallons or larger than 3,000 gallons. If the calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. All sand/grit interceptor shall be installed in accordance with the current edition of the plumbing code as utilized by the local building permitting authority and these regulations and shall be designed, sized, installed, maintained and operated so as to accomplish its intended purpose of intercepting the sand/oil from the customer's wastewater and preventing the discharge of such sand and oil to the City of Loganville's wastewater treatment plant. 
(b)  The size, type and location of each sand/oil interceptor shall be approved by the City of Loganville, in accordance with this regulation. Except where otherwise specifically permitted, no wastes other than those requiring separation shall be discharged into any sand/oil interceptor. One set of plans, including complete mechanical and plumbing sections shall be submitted to the City of Loganville for approval prior to construction. 
(1)  Such plans shall include the size, type and location of each interceptor. 
(2)  Such approval shall not exempt the user from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. 
(3)  Such approval shall not be construed as or act as a guarantee or assurance that any discharge is or will be in compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or order or any governmental authority. 
(4)  Any subsequent alterations or additions to such facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the City of Loganville. 
(c)  Design. 
(1)  All waste shall enter the sand/oil interceptor through the inlet pipe only. 
(2)  Wastes in excess of 140 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be discharged into a sand/oil interceptor and liquid discharged from a sand/oil interceptor shall not exceed 70 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(3)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be so designed and located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and shall have a water seal of not less than six inches. 
(4)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the design specifications contained herein, shall be approved by the City of Loganville and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for sand/oil retention. There shall be a minimum of two manholes to provide access for cleaning and inspection of all fixtures and compartments of the interceptor, a minimum of one per ten feet of interceptor length. In the case of smaller, or circular interceptors, where it is not practical to install two manholes, a single manhole shall be located so as to permit entrance to the first compartment, and inspection of the second. All areas of the second compartment shall be accessible for cleaning. Manhole covers shall be gastight in construction having a minimum opening dimension of 20 inches. In areas where traffic may exist, the interceptor shall be designed to have adequate reinforcement and cover, meeting HS-20 load specifications. 
(5)  If an existing sand/oil interceptor does not meet the design and sizing criteria as set forth, the interceptor shall be replaced with a properly designed and sized interceptor. 
(6)  Upon change of ownership of any existing facility which would be required to have a sand/oil interceptor under this regulation, the applicant for sanitary sewer service shall demonstrate that a properly sized and functioning sand/oil interceptor is installed. 
(7)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be so designed that they will not become air-bound if closed covers are used. The tank and the discharge line shall each be vented, and the vents shall not tie together less than 42 inches above the tank lid elevation. 
(8)  An effluent sampling box shall be provided on the discharge of each sand/oil interceptor where so required by the City of Loganville. 
(d)  Sizing criteria. 
(1)  Sand/oil interceptors. When determining the size of sand/oil interceptor required, the following shall be considered: 
a.  The minimum acceptable volume shall be not less than 750 gallons. 
b.  The minimum acceptable liquid operating depth shall be not less than four feet. 
c.  For facilities or portions thereof in which vehicle washing will not occur: Provide ten gallons of interceptor capacity for each 100 square feet of building drainage area connected to the interceptor. 
d.  For facilities or portions thereof in which vehicle washing will occur: 
1.  For facilities without wash water recovery systems: Provide 600 gallons of interceptor capacity for each wash bay. 
2.  For facilities with wash water recovery systems: Provide an interceptor capacity (liquid capacity in gallons) = wastewater flow rate (gallons per vehicle) × 48. The wastewater flow rate shall be as specified by the manufacturer of the wash water recovery system which will be installed. 
e.  An approximate volume may be determined by multiplying the total rate of flow in gallons per minute from each fixture required to be connected to the interceptor times a minimum retention time of not less than 120 minutes, the resulting volume expressed in gallons. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-175. - Installation. 
(a)  The installation of sand/oil interceptors shall be in accordance with the current edition of the plumbing code as utilized by the local building permitting authority and these regulations, and shall be accomplished in a workman-like manner in compliance with the design and sizing requirements hereunder. 
(b)  The installation of a sand/oil interceptor shall be accomplished by a licensed plumber with documented experience in the installation of such devices. 
(c)  Each sand/oil interceptor shall be readily accessible for inspection, servicing and maintaining in proper working condition. The use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment in order to inspect or service interceptors shall constitute a violation of accessibility. Where feasible, all interceptors shall be located outside of the facility served. Location of all interceptors shall be approved by the City of Loganville, and shall be shown on the approved building plan. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-176. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Sand/oil interceptors shall be maintained by regularly scheduled removal of the accumulated sand and oil so that they will properly operate as intended to intercept the sand and oil from the customer's wastewater and prevent the discharge of sand and oil to the City of Loganville's wastewater treatment plant. 
(b)  Maintenance of sand/oil interceptors shall be done only by a business/professional normally engaged in the servicing of such plumbing fixtures. An individual property owner will not be permitted to accomplish maintenance specified by this regulation. 
(c)  Maintenance shall be performed in a workman-like manner before the retention capacity of the interceptor is exceeded. Detailed and accurate records of maintenance shall be maintained on-site and shall be provided to and available to the City of Loganville upon request. Such maintenance records shall be in the form as approved by the City of Loganville. The records shall include detailed information relating to the amount of sand and oil removed compared to the size of the sand/oil interceptor and one copy of the completed form shall be provided by the customer and the maintenance business to the City of Loganville immediately following completion of maintenance of any sand/oil interceptor within the City of Loganville. 
(d)  A copy of the invoice from the business/professional reporting the date the interceptor was cleaned, the amount of oil and/or sand removed and a recommendation of how frequently the interceptor should be cleaned must be sent to the City of Loganville office after each cleaning. Copies of all sand/oil interceptor cleaning invoices are to be on file at the business being served and available to the City of Loganville upon request. Failure to comply with the above could result in fines, penalties, or disconnection of service. 
(e)  As a minimum, all oil and grit interceptors shall be pumped out and cleaned, at a minimum annually or when 50 percent of the retention capacity is filled with oils and/or solids. The frequency of removal may be increased by City of Loganville or the user to ensure that no overflows of oil, grease or sand into the wastewater system ever occur. 
(1)  A variance from this requirement may be obtained when the affected property owner can confirm that there is no normal use during any given 120-calendar day period. With written authorization from the city, the maximum time variance between services is 365 calendar days. 
(2)  The City of Loganville may inspect the interceptor and outlet and if it is deemed necessary by the City of Loganville, more frequent servicing and maintenance will be required. 
(f)  Biological treatment shall not be a substitute for the servicing of sand/oil interceptors at the frequency determined by the City of Loganville. Emulsification of oil and/or grease with enzyme treatments only delays physical separation. Oil and/or grease may then separate downstream and cause clogging problems in the collection system. A sand/oil interceptor using biological treatment requires continuous monitoring, maintenance and inoculation of the bacterial cultures. 
(g)  The City of Loganville may inspect the sand/oil interceptor monthly to determine the load on the fixture and the effectiveness of maintenance activities. The City of Loganville will inventory all sand/oil interceptors in their service area and document the inspections of these interceptors. 
(h)  Administrative fees. A fee will be charged for an annual inspection by the City of Loganville. If the user's interceptor is not in compliance with this section, a $200.00 re-inspection fee may be charged for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved. 
(1)  These inspections may determine that more frequent maintenance than previously specified is required. 
(i)  Existing sources not connected to a sand/oil interceptor which contribute sand, grit and/or petroleum-based liquid waste to the City of Loganville's wastestream and collection system will be identified through the City of Loganville's inspection program. Once these sources are identified, they may be required to install a sand/oil interceptor and maintain it according to these guidelines. In the time before a sand/oil interceptor can be installed the City of Loganville will require these businesses to implement best management practices (BMPs) to keep sand and oil out of the sanitary sewer system by: 
(1)  Not dumping petroleum-based waste products into the waste collection system; 
(2)  Discontinuing use of wash facilities until such time a suitable system is in place to intercept sand, grit, and petroleum-based products; 
(3)  Sweeping floors and other service areas with hand brooms and dispose of all sweepings as solid waste to minimize the use of wash down water to the greatest extent practicable; 
(4)  Utilizing appropriate absorbent materials to contain and cleanup any spillage of petroleum-based products and disposing of all used absorbent materials as solid waste; and 
(5)  Other practices identified by the City of Loganville and/or facility which will decrease the point source discharge of sand and oil. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-177. - Responsibility, fines and compensation. 
(a)  Property owners and lessees shall be jointly and severally responsible for cleaning sand/oil interceptors, for maintaining the sand/oil interceptor in an efficient operating condition at all times, and for otherwise complying with the provisions of the GOPP and these regulations. 
(b)  The City of Loganville reserves the right to revoke the GOPP and/or levy fines against owners of affected property that do not conform to the City of Loganville's sand/oil interceptor regulations. 
(c)  Compensation shall be paid by the business owner to any surrounding businesses and/or homeowners for damage resulting from any noncompliance of the City of Loganville's regulations. 
(d)  Any extraordinary cost incurred by the City of Loganville due to interference, damage or special processing necessary in the treatment and/or collection system shall be paid by the business. The direct cost of all labor, equipment and materials incurred in rectifying the interference or damage shall be billed directly to the business by the City of Loganville. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-178. - Sewer use regulations. 
(a)  This regulation forms a part of the sewer use regulations of the City of Loganville. 
(1)  Enforcement of this regulation is governed by the express terms hereof and the enforcement provisions of the sewer use regulations, which is incorporated by reference, including, without limitation, those provisions for administrative violations, violation of discharge limitations, enforcement procedures, penalties, field observations, and extra monitoring charges. Any violation of this regulation for sand/oil interceptors shall be considered a discharge violation, major violation, under the enforcement provisions of the sewer use regulations. 
(2)  Compliance with this regulation, as well as the other provisions of the sewer use regulations, shall be the joint and several obligation of the owner of the property served and any party in possession of the property using the wastewater services of the City of Loganville. 
(3)  Any monies due or penalties to the City of Loganville under the provisions of the sewer use regulations shall constitute a lien upon the property served. 
(b)  The City of Loganville has the right to reject any waste which may be harmful to or cause obstruction of the publicly owned wastewater collection system or which may interfere with the operation of the publicly owned treatment works. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Sec. 34-179. - Application. 
This regulation applies to all existing and future uses within the scope of section 34-172 of this article above. Those affected properties currently conducting operations subject to these regulations shall be provided a grace period until January 31, 2012, in which to come into full compliance with these regulations. The City of Loganville has determined that the enactment of this regulation is in the best interest of the City of Loganville and its customers and is necessary for the efficient and proper operation and protection of the City of Loganville's operations and facilities and this regulation is necessary and in furtherance of the health, benefit and welfare of the City of Loganville's customers. 
(Ord. of 4-14-2010) 
Secs. 34-180—34-188. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEWER DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 34-189. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, the term "authorized representative" means: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, authorized representative means a general partner or proprietor, respectively; 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, authorized representative means a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee; 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if: the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city manager or designee. 
Backflow valve means a device constructed of noncorrosive parts which allows flow only in one direction into the sewer collection system and prevents backwater into the customer's development. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, for five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called the house connection. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the US EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a quantitative measure of the amount of oxygen required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) material in wastewater using inorganic dichromate or permanganate salts as oxidants in a two-hour test. 
Color means the optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
Composite sample means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Domestic BOD concentration means the limit shall be 250 milligrams per liter as per definition for biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in this section. 
Domestic suspended solids concentration means the limit shall be 250 milligrams per liter as as per definition for suspended solids in this section. 
Domestic waste means as defined in terms of domestic concentration levels of BOD and suspended solids. 
Domestic wastewater means water-carried wastes of human origin, as opposed to commercial or industrial activities. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Effluent means the wastewater or other liquid, which flows out of a basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Environmental protection division or EPD means the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system or treatment works. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
General pretreatment regulations means "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to same. 
Gpd means gallons per day. 
Grab sample means a sample, which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes. 
Grease means in wastewater, a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain other non-fatty materials. 
Grit means the heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel, or cinders. 
High impact user means a user that requires meter sizes larger than 1½ inches, or that has flow rates of greater than 100 gallons (13.37 cu. ft.) per minute, or that has peak month average day demands of greater than 144,000 gallons (19,251 cu. ft.) per day. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the WQC from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial septage means any waste which is generated at an industrial or commercial facility, which is placed in a container prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
Industrial user or user means an industrial facility, such as a processing or manufacturing plant, discharging wastewaters from domestic, manufacturing, or other process sources. 
Influent means water, wastewater, or other liquid flowing into a reservoir, basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the WQC, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, uses or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder: section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
L means liter. 
Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
Meat packing plants means plants that carry out both the slaughtering and processing of cattle, calves, hogs, poultry, sheep, fish or other animals for the preparation of meat products and byproducts. The slaughtering of animals includes killing and hide removal in the case of cattle, calves and sheep; and scalding and dehairing for hogs; eviscerating; washing of carcasses; plucking of feathers in the case of fowl; washing of the carcasses and cooling. The processing function shall have as its main product fresh meat as whole, half or quarter carcasses or smaller meat cuts, sausages, cooked meats, cured meats, smoked meats, canned meats, frozen or fresh meat cuts, natural sausage casings and other prepared meats and meat specialties. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infections agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
Mg means milligrams. 
Mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued to a WQC or an industry pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)(b) or (c) of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(2)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
O and M means operation and maintenance. 
Oil means compounds of alcohol or glycerol with fatty acids. The term normally includes petroleum products or fatty acids that are liquid at temperatures from 40 degrees to 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Pass-through means a discharge which exits the WQC into waters of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude of duration of a violation). 
Peak month average day demand means the maximum of the monthly water consumptions in a calendar year (January through December) divided by the number of days in the billing cycle for that month. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the WQC. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by processing changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards means prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Private lift stations/collections systems means any private wastewater collection systems including privately owned wastewater pump stations, wet well structures, pumps, force mains and gravity wastewater collection systems associated with a private system. This definition also includes electrical components and systems and property associated with the private system such as easements, driveways and other structures. 
Private wastewater disposal system means a wastewater disposal system requiring an absorption field, unless otherwise stated. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharge means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 34-193. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works or WQC means the term "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment works. 
RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
Residential demand means the peak month average day demand water and/or wastewater capacity associated with a single-family residential unit. This value is the total peak month demand, during a calendar year (January through December) of all residential units in the system divided by the total number of residential accounts in the system for that month. For the purposes of calculating connection fees, this demand is established as 400 gallons of water and 320 gallons of wastewater. Residential wastewater volumes are calculated at 80 percent of water demand. This residential demand may be recalculated, if warranted in the view of the city manager or designee. 
Residential equivalent means the means of relating a high impact user's water and/or sewer demands to that of a single-family residential unit's demands. It is the ratio of the high impact user's peak month average day demand to the residential user's peak month average day demand. 
Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Sewer user charge means the total sewer user charge, which is the sum of the wastewater user charge plus the surcharge. 
SIC means Standard Industrial Classifications. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater; 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WQC's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Significant noncompliance means as defined in section 34-200. 
Significant user means any user of the wastewater system that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of wastewater; 
(2)  Contributes a waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
(3)  Is designated as significant by the city on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the WQC's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Sludge means the accumulated settleable solids separated from liquids, such as water or wastewater, during processing. 
Slug load means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 34-193 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classifications manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt. 
Surcharge. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or empty and water or waste into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city with a 5-day BOD concentration in excess of 250 mg/l, and/or a total suspended solids (TSS) concentration in excess of 250 mg/l, and/or an oil and grease concentration in excess of 100 mg/l, without paying a surcharge. The surcharge assessment will only be based on the concentration in excess of these levels. Then the total sewer user charge would be the normal wastewater user charge plus the surcharge. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.). 
Toxic pollutant means one of 129 pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of section 307 (33 USC 1317) of the Act. 
Treatment plant effluent means any discharge of pollutants from the WQC facility into waters of the state. 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means the United States Code. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the WQC. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment facility means that portion of the water quality control system designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. 
Wastewater user charge means the charge established annually by the city through which each sanitary sewer user pays for the use of said sewer to dispose of his wastewater. This charge should not be confused with the industry cost recovery charge for capital costs. The two charges are separate and independent. The total sewer user charge is the sum of the wastewater user charge plus the surcharge. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means any water, surface or underground, within the boundaries of the state. 
WQC means publicly owned treatment works. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-1(c), (d); Ord. of 9-18-2014(1), § 1) 
Sec. 34-190. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  Requirements for users. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and water quality control facility for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the water quality control (WQC) facility that will interfere with the operation of the wastewater collection; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the WQC facility which will pass through the WQC facility inadequately treated and into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the WQC; 
(3)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(4)  To protect WQC personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(5)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the WQC facility; 
(6)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvements to the WQC facility; and 
(7)  To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws, to which the WQC is subject. 
(b)  Application of article; authorization to enforce. This article shall apply to all users of the city sewage disposal system. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-1(a)) 
Sec. 34-191. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager or designee shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-1(b)) 
Sec. 34-192. - Requirements for building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized persons shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  Classes of permits; application; fees. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent to the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee (not including connection fees) for a residential or commercial building sewer permit or for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Costs borne by owner; city indemnified. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The minimum tap fee shall be as established by the city. 
(d)  Separate sewers required; exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Use of old sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Construction standards. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCE Manual shall apply. 
(g)  Level of sewer placement. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer, or where, in the opinion of the superintendent, the existing septic tank/drain fill will satisfactorily service the basement, the basement only may remain served by said existing system. 
(h)  Surface water and groundwater connection. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  Connection standards. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(j)  Inspections required. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)  Excavation safety requirements. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  Backflow requirements. Upon approval of the ordinance from which this article derives, all new construction will be required to install backflow protection on the customer's lateral connection to the sewer collection system. All bearing of backflow shall be corrosion resistant material. Backflow when fully opened shall have a capacity no less than that of the pipes in which they are installed. Backflow shall be installed so that access is provided to the working parts for service and repair. If the customer does not desire the said backflow protection, he may make an appeal to the superintendent and the city council stating that he will sign a release waiving all rights for protection of blockages and overflows from the sewer collection system. 
(m)  OSHA requirements. All pertinent OSHA requirements relative to implementation of this article shall be met. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-2) 
Sec. 34-193. - General sewer use requirements. 
(a)  Use of public sewers required. 
(1)  Disposal of human and animal waste required. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable waste. 
(2)  Discharge to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or within any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(3)  Privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(4)  Toilet facilities and connection to public sewer required. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human and/or animal occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 30 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(5)  Force main connections. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the city council, to connect to the city sanitary sewage system by means of any force main from a pumping facility or apparatus. If any person should desire to connect a force sanitary sewer main with the sewage system of the city, such person shall make written application to the city council. Such application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications of such proposal, together with such other pertinent information as may be required by the city manager or designee. The city council shall proceed to act on such application and shall take into consideration whether or not such would impose a burden on the city, and in this connection shall consider the useful life of the plumbing facility, the replacement cost thereof, maintenance and repairs thereof, power costs, inflationary trends and any other costs or expense factors in connection therewith. After considering such factors, the city council may require the deposit of a sum of money with the city by the applicant to compensate the city for the burden thereof. The city council may require the conveyance of such pumping facility, together with all appurtenances connected therewith, to the city, together with such certificates of title or evidence of ownership as might be required by the city. It is the intent of this provision that such pumping facility should not become a burden to the city in operating and maintaining the same. The city council shall then deny or grant such request. 
(6)  Exemptions. One-family residences and duplexes containing two-family units are exempted from the provisions of this section, except that a permit shall be obtained by the owner thereof from the city manager or designee prior to installing a sewage pumping device to any sanitary line which connects with the sanitary sewage system of the city. The plans and design of any such device shall be approved by the city manager or designee prior to installation. 
(7)  Penalty for violations of section. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section may, after notice and hearing before city manager and city council, have his sewer and other city utility services discontinued, in the discretion of the city. 
(b)  Private wastewater disposal systems. 
(1)  Provisions for private system. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection (a)(4) of this section, building sewers shall be connected to private wastewater disposal systems complying with the provisions of this section. A private wastewater disposal system shall be a wastewater disposal system requiring an absorption field, unless otherwise stated. 
(2)  Permit and fees. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager or designee. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city manager or designee, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city manager or designee. Permit fees as required by the city shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(3)  Inspection of construction. A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city manager or designee when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspections shall be made in a reasonable length of time by the city manager or designee. 
(4)  Design specifications. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Walton or Gwinnett County Health Department sanitarian. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal systems employing subsurface soil disposal where the lot area is less than the minimum requirements specified by the Walton County Health Department sanitarian. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(5)  Connecting existing system to public sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (a)(4) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days in compliance with this article; provided, that a person shall be entitled to continue to utilize any private wastewater disposal system which may be in use at the time the public sewer becomes available within 200 feet of property line for so long as such system functions properly for the treatment of wastewater as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(6)  Operation and maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times in accordance with the conditions of the operating permit, at no expense to the city. All sludges and byproducts of private wastewater facilities shall be disposed of as provided by section 34-194(e). Such facilities shall be subject to inspection by the Walton County sanitarian at reasonable times. 
(7)  Requirements of other authorities. No requirement contained in this article shall be construed to relieve the applicant of any additional requirements that may be imposed by other authorities having legal jurisdiction. 
(c)  Prohibited discharge standards. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the WQC facility any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the WQC facility whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no user may contribute the following substances to the WQC: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal wastewater collection and WQC, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the WQC facility or equipment, or endangering the city's personnel. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the WQC facility resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than 1½ inches in any dimension. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, cause interference with either the WQC or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(5)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in excess of 25 mg/l. 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the WQC in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with section 34-194(e). 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the city's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the city manager or designee in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(13)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city manager or designee in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(15)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(16)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the WQC. 
(17)  Discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin limited to 200 mg/l. 
(18)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; however, the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of one-half horsepower (0.76 metric horsepower) or greater, or which will allow particle size of one-half inch in any dimension or greater to be discharged to the sewer system shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. Discharge of ground paper products to the sewer system is prohibited. 
Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the WQC. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the WQC. 
(d)  Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. Any amendments thereto are hereby incorporated herein. 
(e)  Specific pollutant limitations. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. 

 
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the WQC. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. At his discretion, the city manager or designee may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations in this subsection. 
(f)  The city's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the WQC if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 34-190 or the general and specific prohibitions in this section. 
(g)  Special agreement. The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the WQC. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(h)  Dilution. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city manager or designee may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(i)  Private lift stations/collections systems, as defined by this chapter must be approved by the by the department of utilities. 
(1)  All private lift stations/collection systems that discharge into the city's sanitary shall be required to pay an annual permit fee as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(2)  All private lift stations/collection systems that discharges into the city's system are required to be inspected annually by the city. The city will provide the owner of the private system a written report that will include recommendations for repairs and preventative maintenance. Any and all repairs that are required to maintain the private system in a functional manner are the responsibility of the owner. 
(3)  All private systems are required to be properly operated, maintained and managed to prevent all unauthorized discharges of sanitary sewer that may affect the quality and use of the waters of the United States, as defined in the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The property owner shall operate and maintain the system and site in a sanitary and effective manner that does not cause a nuisance to nearby property owners. This includes keeping all entrances to site clear of any debris or obstructions and the site location secure at all times as determined by the department of utilities. 
(5)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private system connected to the public system shall comply with all the standards and requirements of the department of utilities. 
(6)  Private systems shall be maintained so as to preclude the entrance of any infiltration and inflow. Should it be determined by the department of utilities that inflow/infiltration is entering the public system from a private system, the owner of the private system shall be responsible for determining the cause and for making all necessary repairs to the city's satisfaction. 
(7)  All operation, maintenance, and repair of private lift stations, collection systems and pumping facilities shall be done by a reputable person or firm experienced in the operation, maintenance and repair of such facilities. Upon demand, property owner shall furnish such proof, as the city deems necessary to demonstrate that the person or firm is fully qualified to perform the tasks. 
(8)  The city shall have the right to inspect all private systems and appurtenances. The city shall have the right to discontinue water or sewer service to the private system if the system is not in compliance, maintained in a sanitary and effective operating condition or if the public health is threatened or public sewers facilities may be harmed. 
(9)  The owner of the private system shall be responsible for notifying the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and the local department of health in the event a sewage spill or overflow occurs within 24 hours of the event taking place. The owner shall take whatever measures are necessary to protect the public health and the environment from contamination as a result of sewer overflow or spill. The owner shall clean up overflows or spills as soon as possible after discovery. 
(10)  The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or operation of the private system. 
(11)  The rate structure and connection fees for any development which has a private lift station/collection system will be determined on a per unit structure of the development. 
(12)  Violations of this section are subject to enforcement actions and fines as outlined in sections 34-201, 34-202 and 34-203. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-3; Ord. of 9-18-2014(1), § 2) 
Sec. 34-194. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities discharge. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 34-193 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the city manager or designee, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Meat packing plant requirements. No meat packing or allied products plants shall discharge waste or water into the wastewater system owned and operated by the city unless the following conditions are met: 
a.  There shall be a separation of domestic wastewater from the bathrooms and the packing wastewater. The domestic wastewater from all bathrooms may be emptied directly into the city sewer system. If there are floor drains in the bathroom area, these drains must be so arranged that no byproducts of production can be emptied directly or indirectly into them. 
b.  The wastewater from the packing of the meat products shall be collected and all of it passed through a vibrating and a rotating type screen so as to eliminate any feathers or meat or hair or other packing byproducts from entering the city system. All packing wastewater, before entering the city system, must pass through a 30 divisions per inch by 20 divisions per inch mesh vibrating screen or a device that will provide a complete separation of feathers, hair, offal and other packing byproducts. All floor drains or outside drains in pits shall be so connected that they will go through this screening process and no traps left available where covers may be raised and feathers, hair, offal other packing byproducts emptied to go into the wastewater system of the city without first going through these screens. 
c.  All plants shall furnish at their expense a layout showing the arrangement of their wastewater piping or troughs to be approved by the city manager or designee. 
d.  If sufficient fall is not available at the packing plants for effective screening, then a system of pumping the wastewater to provide the screening must be provided at the owner's expense to adequately accomplish the screening. 
e.  All meat processors not covered under this meat packing section will be subject to the provisions of section 34-193(f). 
(2)  Control of discharge. As a result of upset to the WQC, the city manager or designee may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste stream from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the WQC and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city manager or designee and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as interpreted in article V of this chapter or as needed, by the owner at his expense. 
(4)  Flammable substances. Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(5)  Explosion hazard. At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the WQC, or at any point in the WQC, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. The city manager or designee may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the city manager or designee shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges. 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the WQC of any accidental or slug discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in section 34-193. 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Tenant responsibility. Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be accepted into the WQC at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the city manager or designee, provided such wastes do not violate section 34-193 or any other requirements established or adopted by the city. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the city with approval of city manager or designee. 
(2)  The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as industrial septage requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the city. Only wastes generated within the city will be accepted. The city manager or designee shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes, if such disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation. Waste haulers are subject to all other sections of this article. 
(3)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring to discharge or empty any septic tank or portable toilet contents shall be certified in accordance with Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal System, chapter 270-5-25, Georgia Department of Human Resources, and the Walton County environmental health department. 
(4)  No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or empty any matter or contents of a septic tank or portable toilets into the wastewater system of the city without paying the charge hereinafter imposed and discharging the same at the point hereinafter indicated. The charge for emptying matter from a septic tank and portable toilets or the contents thereof into the wastewater system of the city shall be as established by the city. The point of emptying of the same shall be at the city water quality control plant located on Highway 81 North. Any person desiring to utilize this service shall be required to purchase tickets from the city prior to discharging. 
(5)  No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or empty any matter or contents of grease, oil or sand interceptors into any part of the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city. 
(6)  Liquid wastes or byproducts transported over highways or public roads or streets of the city shall be in watertight and completely covered containers or vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-4) 
Sec. 34-195. - Wastewater discharge permit—Eligibility. 
(a)  Wastewater survey. When requested by the city manager or designee all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The city manager or designee is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(b)  Permit requirements. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user or significant user to discharge wastewater into the city without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city manager or designee. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permitted to the provisions set out in sections 34-201 through 34-203. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(2)  The city manager or designee may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Existing connections. Any significant industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the WQC prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the city for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (f) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the WQC to continue after 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  New connections. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging industrial wastes into the WQC must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. 
(e)  Application; contents. In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all significant users required to have a wastewater discharge permit must submit the information required by section 34-197(a)(2). The city manager or designee shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. In addition, the following information may be requested: 
(1)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the WQC. 
(2)  Hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation of the facility. 
(3)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. 
(4)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(5)  The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
(6)  Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the city manager or designee for review in accordance with accepted engineering practices. 
(7)  Time and duration of the discharge. 
(8)  Average and peak flow rates for all non-process flows. 
(9)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city manager or designee to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(f)  Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designated to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(g)  Determinations. The city manager or designee will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed wastewater discharge permit application, the city manager or designee will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The city manager or designee may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-5) 
Sec. 34-196. - Same—Issuance process. 
(a)  Permit duration. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five years, at the discretion of the city manager or designee. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Conditions attached to permits. Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the city manager or designee to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the WQC. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years. 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
c.  Effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law. 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sample frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. 
e.  Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties. 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
d.  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges. 
e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WQC. 
f.  The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the WQC. 
g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment. 
h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit. 
i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the city in writing to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance. Said petition shall be heard by the city council. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, that the party seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the city within 30 days. 
(d)  Modification of permit. The city manager or designee may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation, process, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(3)  A change in the WQC that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's WQC facility, city personnel, or the receiving waters. 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit. 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting. 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(e)  Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least three days' advance notice, in writing, to the city manager or designee and the city manager or designee approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city manager or designee must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. The responsibility for the pretreatment facility shall remain with the original owner or operator until the above written statement from the new owner or operator is received and approved by the city manager or designee. 
(f)  Revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city manager or designee of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city manager or designee of changed condition pursuant to section 34-197(e). 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(8)  Failure to pay fines. 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility. 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(g)  Voided permits. Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon non-use, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(h)  Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application in accordance with section 34-195(e) a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-6) 
Sec. 34-197. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the WQC, shall be required to submit to the city manager or designee a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city manager or designee a report which contains the information listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
(2)  The industrial user shall submit the information required by this section including: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
b.  Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the WQC from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the WQC from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  Identification of the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  Submission of the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and longterm average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (j) of this section. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (k) of this section. 
f.  Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M shall be required. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
h.  All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-195(f). 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress report. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection (a)(2)g of this section: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city manager or designee no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay (and, if appropriate) the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
(1)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WQC, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in subsections (a)(2)d through f of this section. 
(2)  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's a longterm production rate. 
(3)  For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-195(f). 
(d)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the city manager or designee but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 34-195(f). 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements in and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WQC, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (k) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Report of changed conditions. Each industrial user is required to notify the city manager or designee of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The city manager or designee may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 34-195(e). 
(2)  The city manager or designee may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 34-195(g) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 34-196(d). 
(3)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition until and unless the city manager or designee has responded in writing to the industrial user's notice. 
(4)  For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. 
(f)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the WQC (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 34-193, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless the requirement is waived by the city manager or designee, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WQC, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article. 
(3)  Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (f)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(g)  Reports from nonsignificant industrial users. All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city manager or designee may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the city manager or designee within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city manager or designee within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the WQC performs monitoring at the industrial user's facility at least once a month, or if the WQC performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the WQC, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the WQC of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the WQC, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changes in discharges must be submitted under subsection (e) of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (a), (c), and (d) of this section. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (i)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the WQC, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(j)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(k)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (k)(2) of this section, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is not feasible, the city manager or designee may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that these will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(l)  Determination of noncompliance. The city manager or designee may use a grab sample to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
(m)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(n)  Recordkeeping. Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records and information required to be retained under this article. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-7) 
Sec. 34-198. - Compliance monitoring. 
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the city manager or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or monitoring of the user's operations. 
(3)  The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated per the manufacturer's specifications, but no less than semiannually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the request of the city manager or designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  Where the city holds an easement, duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(7)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner, and the city shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by the city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner to maintain safe conditions. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-8) 
Sec. 34-199. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-9) 
Sec. 34-200. - Publication of list of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
The city shall publish annually, in the largest general circulation newspaper published in the city, a list of the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of the city personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-10) 
Sec. 34-201. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city manager or designee finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city manager or designee may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city manager or designee. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The city manager or designee is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The city manager or designee may order any user which causes or contributes to violation of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city manager or designee and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(d)  Compliance orders. When the city manager or designee finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within 30 days. If the user does not come into compliance within 30 days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established or a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the city manager or designee finds that a user is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city manager or designee may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements. 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user that is found to have violated any provision of this article, its wastewater discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the city manager or designee shall have such other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city manager or designee to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. The city manager or designee shall convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days of receiving the request from the industrial user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The city manager or designee may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager or designee may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the WQC, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager or designee shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the WQC, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager or designee shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. 
(3)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city manager or designee, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections (c) and (j) of this section. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(h)  Termination of discharge. In addition to those provisions in section 34-196(f), any user that violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 34-193. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-11) 
Sec. 34-202. - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the city manager or designee may petition the superior court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or the requirement imposed by this article or activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city manager or designee for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The city manager or designee may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. 
(2)  Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the WQC which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000.00 and/or be subject to imprisonment for six months. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(3)  Any user that knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in sections 34-200 through 34-203 are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-12) 
Sec. 34-203. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The city manager or designee may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city manager or designee to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Financial asssurance. The city manager or designee may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any order, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurance sufficient to restore or repair damage to the WQC caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(d)  Public nuisances. Any violation of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-13) 
Sec. 34-204. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the WQC and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five working days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance. 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue. 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(b)  General/specific prohibitions. An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibitions in section 34-193 if: 
(1)  It can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or interference; and 
(2)  That either a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through or interference; or 
(3)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (c), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (1), except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  Limitations. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this section. 
(3)  Prior notice. 
a.  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the WQC, at least ten days before the date of the bypass if possible. 
b.  An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the WQC within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times; and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The WQC may waive requirement for the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  Prohibition; exception. Bypass is prohibited, and the WQC may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment equipment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
The WQC may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the WQC determines that it will meet the conditions in subsection (c)(4)a of this section 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-14) 
Sec. 34-205. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The city may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications. 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users. 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-15) 
Sec. 34-206. - Connection fees—Generally. 
(a)  The wastewater connection fee basic rate shall be as provided by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Users of the wastewater system shall pay a connection fee before new or additional wastewater service can be made available. Users will be subject to the fee at the time new wastewater service is requested. Users shall also be subject to the fee when their existing wastewater service tap is inadequate to carry the volume of wastewater desired and the wastewater service tap size is increased. High impact users shall also be subject to the fee if the user's peak month average day demand is found to be greater than the initial estimated demand. All users shall be subject to the connection fee regardless of location of the service tap. 
(c)  Once a user has paid a connection fee to the city it shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-16) 
Sec. 34-207. - Same—Payment. 
Users shall pay the connection fee at the time the application is made with the city manager or designee to increase the size of the existing wastewater service tap or for a new or additional wastewater service tap. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-17) 
Sec. 34-208. - Revenue restrictions. 
All revenues received from the wastewater system connection fee shall be used only for debt service payments for capital improvements or deposited into the city's water and sewer fund for purchase of capital improvements. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-18) 
Sec. 34-209. - Wastewater user charges—System for determination generally. 
(a)  Liability for surcharge, determination of total charge, establishing rate. No person shall discharge or empty any water or waste into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city with a five-day BOD concentration in excess of the domestic level, a suspended solids concentration in excess of the domestic level, or oil and grease concentration in excess of 100 mg/l without paying the surcharge on sewer user charges imposed under this article. The surcharge assessment will only be based on the concentration in excess of the domestic levels for five-day BOD and suspended solids, and 100 mg/l for oil and grease. Discharge of wastewater with five-day BOD in excess of 1,000 mg/l, suspended solids in excess of 750 mg/l, and oil and grease in excess of 200 mg/l will be prohibited. The total sewer user charge would then be the normal sewer user charge plus the surcharge. The rates of both the user charge and surcharge shall be established by the city manager or designee. 
(b)  User charge rate criterion. The minimum criterion for establishment of the user charge rate shall be to recover the annual operation and maintenance cost for providing collection and treatment of domestic wastewater. Said operations and maintenance portion of the rate shall be evaluated within a reasonable time prior to the end of each year. If the operation and maintenance portion of the revenues exceeds the operation and maintenance portion of the expenses, said excess revenues shall be credited toward the next year's operation and maintenance portion of the wastewater user's charge. 
(c)  Surcharge rate criterion. The minimum criterion for establishment of the surcharge rate shall be to recover the additional annual operation and maintenance cost for providing collection and treatment of wastewaters in excess of domestic wastewater concentrations. 
(d)  Determining users liable for surcharge. The city manager or designee shall determine which users are discharging waters or waste to the wastewater collection and treatment system in excess of acceptable levels. This shall be accomplished by application of provisions of sections 34-196 and 34-197 and the wastewater monitoring program conducted by the city manager or designee. 
(e)  Billing, payment of surcharge. The surcharge shall be billed monthly by the city manager or designee with the normal user charge, and the conditions for payment and penalties applicable to the normal user charge shall apply to the surcharge. 
(f)  Unacceptable wastes not subject to surcharge. There shall be no surcharge provisions for toxic pollutants in excess of concentrations defined in section 34-193(c)—(e). This decision is based on the fact that the city's wastewater treatment and collection system is not designed to facilitate the removal of the items referred to in this section. Any person in violation of this subsection shall be subject to the provisions set out in sections 34-200—34-203. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-19) 
Sec. 34-210. - Same—Rates; billing and collection; security deposits. 
(a)  "Wastewater system user" defined, required to pay for system use; classified. The term "wastewater system user," for the purposes of this section, means any person, firm or corporation discharging or emptying any water or waste into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the city. Such users will be required to pay for the use of the system as provided herein. The wastewater system users shall be divided into two user classes as follows: 
(1)  Residential users. Private dwellings, nursing homes, trailers in trailer parks, apartments, fraternities, sororities, boardinghouses and roominghouses, facilities of the Athens housing authority, dormitories, single-family dwelling units located in an apartment complex, mobile home parks, apartment houses or facilities, or condominium complexes or facilities, or similar facilities; 
(2)  Nonresidential users. Any business or enterprise, including ice or concrete products manufacturers, churches, schools, offices, public buildings, hospitals, YWCA, YMCA, hotels, motels, tourist courts, processing or manufacturing plants, and any customer not covered under the residential user class definition. 
(b)  Determination of total charge. The total user charge shall be equal to the base charge for collection and treatment of wastewater within domestic level concentrations plus the surcharge for collection and treatment of wastewater in excess of domestic level concentrations. Those wastewaters which are in excess of domestic level concentrations shall be those with BOD or suspended solids concentrations greater than 250 parts per million and oil and grease concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. 
(c)  Calculation, applicability of monthly unit charge. The unit charge rate shall be a cost per unit of wastewater volume amount. This rate shall be multiplied times the volume of wastewater returned to the sanitary sewer each month by the user. The results shall be the monthly unit charge. The unit charge shall be applicable to all user classes. 
(d)  Sewer rates established. Users shall pay the rates as set forth by the city council. 
(e)  Calculation of monthly surcharge. The surcharge rate shall be a cost per pound of BOD or suspended solids or oil and grease figure. This rate shall be multiplied times the pounds of five-day BOD, suspended solids or oil and grease discharged to the sanitary sewer each month by the user. The poundage shall be based on that concentration of five-day BOD and suspended solids over and above the domestic level or oil and grease above 100 mg/l and the volume of wastewater discharged on an average daily basis. The results shall be the monthly surcharge. 
(f)  Base charges. The base charge shall be as set forth by the city council. When a customer requests that his water service be turned off, he will have to pay a base charge for that period of time for which his water service was turned off. Otherwise, the customer shall be considered to have use of the sanitary sewer system, and all applicable charges shall apply. 
(g)  Determination of volume of wastewater for residential users. A residential user's wastewater volume shall be determined by 100 percent of the user's monthly water consumption. However, as an alternative to the method outlined in subsection (c) of this section, the user may install an extra meter under the same rules and conditions as all meters connected to the waterworks system for use exclusively for irrigation or other uses where none of the water would be returned to the sanitary sewer system, and no sewer charge would be made on this meter. The water used on the original meter measuring household use would be charged for wastewater usage at 100 percent of the water volume. 
(h)  Determination of volume of wastewater for nonresidential customers. Nonresidential user's wastewater volume shall be determined by 100 percent of the user's monthly water consumption. 
(i)  Charging system users not utilizing the city water. Any wastewater system user having as its source of water a supply other than that owned and operated by the city shall be subject to the charges established in this section. That user shall also install a water meter, approved by the city manager or designee, in the user's water supply line between the source and the building where the water usage occurs and the wastewater discharge originates. A wastewater system user of this type shall be required to pay the base and surcharges described in subsections (e) and (f) of this section. The wastewater volumes shall be determined using the same percentages set forth above for residential, commercial and industrial users. The provisions of this Code applicable to the installation of water meters, reading of meters, billing, penalties, and termination of service for water shall apply to the meters and charges prescribed by this subsection. 
(j)  Late payment of bills. For failure of any user of the wastewater system to pay user charges when due, the user shall be subject to the penalties presently authorized or that may be authorized in the future by the city council for the failure to pay a water bill when due. 
(k)  Reinstatement of service. Any property owner whose sewer service by the city shall have been disconnected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall have such sewer service reinstated upon compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment to the city of a reinstatement fee covering all costs for restoration of sewer service. 
(l)  Security deposits. In the case of mobile home parks, apartments, townhouses, motels or hotels, dwelling units or condominium complexes organized under the provisions of the Apartment Ownership Act or similar act of the general assembly, the city manager or designee shall cause or require a security deposit. A deposit may also be required of any customer that has a record of delinquency for payment of sewer or water accounts or taxes due the county, bankruptcy, insolvency, where a foreclosure proceeding is pending with respect to property served, or where there is a reasonable likelihood that the account would not be paid. The deposit shall be paid at such times and in such amounts as may be specified by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-20) 
Sec. 34-211. - Capital cost recovery. 
All industries, as defined in the industrial section of this article of the city, discharging process wastewater into the city wastewater collection and treatment system shall be subject to the capital cost recovery charges associated with providing wastewater collection and treatment. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-21) 
Sec. 34-212. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Pipeline construction parallel to existing sewers. No person shall lay any main pipe for gas, water or sewage, or conduit for any purpose in any street, within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer unless with the permission of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Transportation of liquid waste over highways. Liquid wastes or byproducts transported over highways or public roads or streets of the city shall be in watertight and completely covered containers or vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2002(2), § 5-1-22) 
Secs. 34-213—34-232. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 34-233. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Channel protection means as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. Credits for on-site stormwater systems shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the site. 
Customers of the stormwater utility means and include all persons, properties, and entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surface as defined in this section. 
(1)  Detached dwelling unit means developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar nonresidential uses. Detached dwelling units shall not include developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-dwelling-unit residential properties. 
(2)  Duplexes and triplexes means developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) attached residential dwelling units located on one or more parcels of land. 
(3)  Multiple-dwelling-unit residential properties means developed land whereon four or more attached residential dwelling units are located and shall include, but not be limited to, apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boardinghouses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which four or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. 
(4)  Other developed land means, but shall not be limited to, multiple dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, water reservoirs, and water and wastewater treatment plants. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) of impervious area means the median average impervious coverage of detached dwelling unit properties in the city as determined by the city, and shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service charges to detached dwelling unit properties or classes of detached dwelling unit properties and other properties. Three thousand square feet of impervious area shall be one equivalent unit. 
Hydrologic response means the hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions, and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Service charges means the periodic rate, fee, or charge applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city stormwater utility. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of developed land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Stormwater management systems means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourses for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, bridges, gulches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catchbasins and street facilities; all inlets; collection, drainage or disposal lines; intercepting sewers; disposal plants; outfall sewers; all pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances; all extension, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; and any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities expressly excludes any of the foregoing which exist for, or are used exclusively for the purpose of collection, treating, measuring, supplying, or distributing potable water within or as part of the city water supply and treatment system, or any of the foregoing which exist for or are used exclusively for the purpose of collecting, treating, or measuring effluent within or as part of the city sanitary sewer system. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. For purposes of this article, the term "undeveloped land" also includes property altered from its natural state by the creation or installation of less than 200 square feet of impervious surface. 
Water quality means as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.3) 
Sec. 34-234. - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The city stormwater management plan properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
(2)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the stormwater management plan, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(3)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the corporate limits. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the corporate limits is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(4)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and facilities renders and/or results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents in a variety of ways as identified in the legal, professional engineering and financial analysis. The service and benefit rendered or resulting from provision of stormwater management systems and facilities may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including, but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs, and risk exposure. 
(5)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems that have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in the city in concert with the management of other water resources in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(6)  The city council finds, concludes and determines that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering and funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(7)  An equitable approach to funding stormwater management services and facilities can be provided by adopting a schedule of service charges upon properties that is related to the burden of stormwater quality control service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city. Such schedule of service charges can be complemented by other funding methods that address specific needs to stormwater drainage improvement projects. 
(8)  Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the city, and therefore is an appropriate parameter for calculating stormwater service charges and associated credits. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.1) 
Sec. 34-235. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service charges or receive a credit or offset against such service charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater service charges shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race, or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. 
(b)  Undeveloped land as defined in this article shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(c)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(d)  Road rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service charges. However, structures, driveways, or other developed land used for road purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.9) 
Sec. 34-236. - Utility established; fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater management utility within the city which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the city's corporate limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. Such utility shall be under the direction of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish a Stormwater Enterprise Fund in the city budget and accounting system, separate and apart from its general fund, for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the city council. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be deposited promptly upon receipt into the Stormwater Enterprise Fund, to be held and invested in trust for the purposes dedicated, and expended exclusively for purposes of the utility, including capital project construction. No other funds of the city shall be deposited in the Stormwater Enterprise Fund or commingled with dedicated stormwater revenues, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the Stormwater Enterprise Fund, including grants, loans, and bond proceeds may be combined with and applied to stormwater management capital projects as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon recommendation of the city manager or designee. 
(c)  The city council hereby transfers to the city manager or designee operational control over the existing stormwater management systems owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.2) 
Sec. 34-237. - Scope of responsibility for the city drainage system. 
(a)  The city drainage system consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches, swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catchbasins, pipes, head walls and other structures, natural or manmade, within the political boundaries of the city which control and/or convey stormwater through which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The city owns or has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvements to those segments of this system which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way, and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use, or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of systems and facilities. 
(b)  Operation and maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities for operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of the systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, homeowner association or its occupant, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by the laws of the state and the United States of America. 
(c)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.4) 
Sec. 34-238. - Requirements for on-site systems; enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  All property owners and developers of developed real property within the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city development regulations and the laws of the state and the United States of America. 
(b)  Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by the city in the municipal court of the appropriate county. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. 
(c)  From date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights that may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of appropriate county. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereof in order to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.5) 
Sec. 34-239. - Determination and modification of service charges. 
Stormwater service charges shall be determined and modified from time to time by the city manager or designee. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the objective of the city to establish rates, fees and charges that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of stormwater management services and facilities to those properties which benefit therefrom and which, together with any other sources of revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility, will be sufficient to meet the cost of budgeted programs, services and facilities, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on revenue bond obligations incurred for construction and improvements to the stormwater system. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.6) 
Sec. 34-240. - Service charges—Effective date. 
Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning July 1, 2006 and shall be billed yearly and identified as a stormwater utility fee on the city tax bill or utility bill. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.7) 
Sec. 34-241. - Same—Rates. 
The following stormwater rates shall apply: 
(1)  All single detached dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit 
(2)  All multiple dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one equivalent residential unit times the number of dwelling units located on the multiple dwelling property times an adjustment factor that adjusts the equivalent residential unit (ERU) to equal the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of a single dwelling unit within a multiple-dwelling lot in the city which has been determined to be 0.7 equivalent residential unit as specified in subsection (3) of this section, or as amended in the future. 
(3)  Other developed lands. All developed lands shall be billed a minimum of one equivalent residential unit or for one equivalent residential unit (ERU) for each 3,000 square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof on the property, rounded to the next highest tenth of an equivalent residential unit. 
(4)  Stormwater service charge rate per equivalent residential unit (ERU) or increment thereof. The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be as established by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.8) 
Sec. 34-242. - Same—Credits. 
(a)  Developed land. Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities. Stormwater service charge credits shall be determined based on the technical requirements and the design and performance standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. Stormwater service charge credits may total up to 40 percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be granted in the following increments: 
(1)  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet water quality in accordance with this Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(2)  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities properly sized and functioning to meet the channel protection standards in accordance with this Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(3)  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the over-bank flood protection in accordance with this Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(4)  Ten percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the extreme flood protection standards properly as defined in the Statewide Stormwater Sizing Criteria for Stormwater Control and Mitigation Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(5)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards and/or upon continuing provision of the systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. A credit may be revoked by the city at any time for noncompliance. 
(b)  Educational credit. In addition to the foregoing credits based upon the design and performance of on-site systems, an educational credit shall be available to all public and private schools or school systems which agree to teach a stormwater program, an environmental science curriculum approved by the state department of education, in grades kindergarten (K) through 12. The educational credit may be up to 40 percent of the service charge applicable to a school property, and shall be proportional to the extent the approved curriculum is taught. Educational credits may be taken in conjunction with any other credit available under this section. The superintendent of schools shall certify annually to the city manager or designee, before July 1 the extent to which the curriculum was taught. 
(c)  Application. Property owners seeking service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits in writing to the city manager or designee by July 1 of each year. Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the city for the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed. 
(d)  Determination. Upon receipt of a timely filed completed application, the city manager or designee shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was submitted to the city. 
(e)  Conditions. Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on the following: 
(1)  Continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time; and 
(2)  Continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. 
(f)  Revocation. The city may revoke any credit at any time for noncompliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.10) 
Sec. 34-243. - Same—Billing, delinquencies, collections. 
(a)  A stormwater service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land, as shown from public land records of Walton County or Gwinnett County, shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is under-billed or if no bill is sent for developed land, the city may back-bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency. A ten percent late charge shall be billed based on the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(b)  Suits for collection shall be commenced by the city in the county of the owner's residence; provided, however, if the owner is not a resident of this state, suit may be filed in the superior court of the appropriate county. No lien shall be imposed for delinquent collections unless a judgment is first obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.11) 
Sec. 34-244. - Same—Billed in common. 
The stormwater utility service charge maybe billed on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services at the city's sole discretion. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.12) 
Sec. 34-245. - Appeals. 
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager or designee. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using the information provided by the appellant, the director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the director may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  A decision of the director which is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the city manager within 30 days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. Notice of the appeal shall be served on the city manager by the appellant, stating the grounds for the appeal. The city manager shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days. All decisions of the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail sent to the billing address of the appellant. 
(5)  All decisions by the city manager shall be final. 
(6)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city manager may be reviewed upon application for writ of certiorari before the superior court of the appropriate county, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. 
(Ord. of 8-11-2005, § 22-108.11) 
ARTICLE VIII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 34-246. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-247. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2, in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-248. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Loganville. 
Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit, or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-249. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer and sanitation services. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: None identified to date. 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as possible processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-250. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall appear in person and provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer including full name, date of birth, current address, and Social Security Number. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-251. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by authorized city personal on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the finance director and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-252. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-253. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or is similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but not subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-254. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee should attempt to perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identify theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may, in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director, in his or discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-255. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-256. - Program administration. 
The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 34-257. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 1) 
ARTICLE IX. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 34-258. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-259. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-260. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Loganville. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-261. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-262. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it receives the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 34-263. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. of 8-13-2009, § 2) 
Secs. 34-264—34-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 34-301. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to establish the use of reclaimed water within the City of Loganville in accordance with all environmental regulations. It is the intent of the city to minimize the use of potable water for nonpotable uses. It is the intent of the city to establish a reclaimed water system for the city's service area in a manner which benefits the community. 
(1)  Reclaimed water involves taking wastewater from the city's water treatment plants, giving it a high degree of treatment and using the resulting high quality water for a new beneficial use. Reclaimed water is delivered to homes and businesses through an underground distribution system entirely separate from the drinking water system. Reclaimed water can serve in many capacities where it is unnecessary to use high-quality, potable (or drinkable) water. Uses of reclaimed water include: Irrigating lawns and landscaping designs; use in fountains or decorative pools, and firefighting. Using reclaimed water is known as "water reuse." 
(2)  Purposes of water reuse. The city's reclaimed water system can save extensive amounts of drinking water each day, and its use is less expensive for the vast majority of customers. Promoting greater use of reclaimed water among private developments helps to delay the need for developing costly new water sources and building or expanding very expensive treatment plants. Promotion of water reuse also helps the city to comply with permits relating to its water supply and wastewater treatment. 
(3)  When required. When the following types of developments, or portions thereof, are located within a reasonable distance (as determined by the director and city engineer) of where there will be city reclaimed water distribution mains, those developments shall be constructed with the ability to connect to the city's reclaimed water system: 
a.  Golf courses, recreational fields. 
b.  Areas of more than one-quarter acre of landscaping, or green space. 
c.  Uses requiring on-site firefighting water supply. 
d.  Subdivisions or other residential developments of ten units or more. 
e.  Other direct reuse sites (areas permitted for the application or impoundment of reclaimed water) identified by the zoning administrator or city engineer that reasonably preclude human contact with reclaimed water. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-2015(3)) 
Sec. 34-302. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Backflow prevention device shall mean either a reduced pressure or a double check valve assembly that protects the city public potable water supply at the service connection by isolating within the customer's premises actual or potential pollution or contamination due to cross connection. 
Bulk rate user shall mean the actual nonresidential user of reclaimed water inside or outside the city limits that has an agreement for a specified reclaimed water rate. 
Cross connection shall mean any physical connection or arrangement which could allow the movement of fluids between the potable water system and any other piping system, such as reclaimed water. 
Customer shall mean the actual user of reclaimed water. 
Department shall mean the water quality control department of the city. 
Director shall mean the water quality control director or his/her designee. 
Distribution main shall mean a conduit used to supply reclaimed water to a service line from a transmission line. 
Duplex means a two-family dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof, providing independent living facilities for one family including provisions for living, sleeping and complete kitchen facilities. 
Hose bibb means a special connection installed and provided by the city at certain points of delivery of reclaimed water that will enable the customer to attach a hose with a customized adaptor to use reclaimed water for nonpotable purposes. 
Industrial/commercial reclaimed water use means reclaimed water that is used by the customer for nonpotable purposes other than irrigation and other residential type applications. The director shall determine industrial/commercial reclaimed water use applications, which shall be metered. 
Interruptible service means reclaimed water can be periodically stopped due to operational and/or seasonal fluctuations in supplies needed to meet demands. 
LAC shall mean the City of Loganville Administrative Code. 
Master control valve shall mean the city-installed and maintained manually operated valve which controls the total reclaimed water flow to the customer's property. 
Meter shall mean a flow measuring device to monitor the total reclaimed water flow to the customer's property. 
Multifamily means a detached building designed for four or more dwelling units. 
Nonpotable water shall mean water that is not intended for drinking or culinary purposes. 
Pervious area means the total property area of a customer, in acres, less the impervious area as computed for stormwater management utility billing purposes, rounded to the nearest tenth of an acre. 
Point of delivery or service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the public reclaimed water system at the downstream end of the meter set, hose bibb or other device installed and maintained by the city. 
Potable water means water that does not contain objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals or infection and that is considered satisfactory for domestic consumption; in short, suitable for drinking purposes. 
Property owner shall mean the owner of property receiving reclaimed water service. 
PVC pipe shall mean polyvinyl chloride pipe. 
Reclaimed water shall mean water that has received advanced waste treatment with high level disinfection. 
Service line shall mean that conduit to convey reclaimed water from the distribution main to the customer's property line. 
Shutoff valve means a required, manually operated valve provided, installed and maintained by the customer downstream from the point of delivery that controls the reclaimed water flow to the customer's own system using reclaimed water. 
Single-family means a detached building or portion thereof designed for one dwelling unit. 
Transmission main shall mean a conduit that conveys reclaimed water from the treatment plant to a booster pumping station or a trunk main. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-303. - Delivery of reclaimed/reuse water. 
(a)  The City of Loganville shall deliver reclaimed/reuse water from a meter or meters owned and maintained by the City of Loganville, only for those uses stated in this article and/or in the application for service, as approved by the City of Loganville. 
(b)  The City of Loganville does not guarantee to deliver reclaimed/reuse water to any property owner's customer at any specific operating pressure. If by reason of force majeure, the City of Loganville shall be rendered unable to wholly or in part to deliver reuse water, this failure shall not be considered a breach of this agreement. The term "force majeure", as used in this agreement shall mean acts of God, strikes, lockouts or other industrial disturbances, acts of the public enemy orders of any kind from the state or federal government, or any civil or military authority, insurrection, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, tornadoes, storms, washouts, droughts, power failures, arrests, restraints of government and people, civil disturbances, explosions, breakage or accidents to machinery, pipelines/distributions systems, pumps and the like, the partial or entire failure of the City of Loganville reuse water system, unsuitable reuse/reclaimed water quality or other causes. State law regulates the quality of the reuse water supplied by the City of Loganville. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-304. - Reclaimed/reuse water service inside city. 
Reclaimed water service will be made available for properties located within the boundaries of the service area of the city which comply with the provisions for such service as set forth in this article when the city's reclaimed water distribution system is extended and the provision of reclaimed water is available to customers in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-2015(3)) 
Sec. 34-305. - Conveyances. 
Pipeline conveyance means any system of pipelines that transports reclaimed water from a treatment facility to either a meter or the point of land application or end use. When required by the city to install a reclaimed water system, the developer shall construct a pipeline conveyance from a meter(s) to the point of land application or end use so that: reclaimed water does not find its way into, or otherwise contaminate, a potable water system; system structural integrity is maintained; and the capability for inspection, maintenance, and testing is maintained. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-306. - Availability of service. 
The existence of a reclaimed water main adjacent to or near the premises of an applicant for reclaimed water service does not necessarily mean that service is available to that location. A property owner may not connect or otherwise make use of reclaimed water transmission mains unless approved by the department. Service in areas where only transmission mains exist will normally require the installation of a distribution main for service. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-307. - Public easement requirements. 
(a)  No reclaimed water main shall be constructed, installed, or accepted by the city for maintenance unless the reclaimed water main is located in public rights-of-way or easements suitable for such purpose. Extensions to the system outside of existing rights-of-way shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the city a permanent utility/reclaimed/reuse water system easement across any property traversed by the water system. Such easement shall be properly executed and filed with the appropriate court prior to the department allowing any extension of the system. 
(b)  Any new easement shall be adequately sized to accommodate the construction, installation and maintenance of any reclaimed water system component. No obstruction of whatever kind shall be planted, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the easement or right-of-way without written permission of the director. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-308. - Ownership. 
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances, from the reclaimed water main to the customer side of the meter connection when constructed, installed, or accepted by the city, shall become and remain the property of the city. By constructing or installing facilities or appurtenances accepted by the city, no person shall acquire any interest or right therein other than the privilege of connecting to the reclaimed water system utility and receiving services therefrom. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-309. - Identification. 
All customers of the reclaimed water system are responsible for adequately identifying all reclaimed water pipes and ground level or above appurtenances by color and appropriate signage. Specifically, the coloration standard for reclaimed water systems is Pantone Purple 522C. All piping and pipelines shall be color-coded using Pantone Purple 522 using sunlight stable pigment. All valves, fire hydrants, and outlets shall be tagged and color-coded purple to differentiate reclaimed water from potable water. All reclaimed water valves and outlets shall be appropriately tagged or labeled "Do Not Drink" together with the equivalent standard international symbol to warn the public and employees that the water is not intended for drinking. Where hose bibbs are present on reclaimed water lines, different sizes from those on potable water supply lines shall be established to preclude interchange of hoses. Cam Lock connection assemblies in small sizes (one-half to three-quarter-inch) with lockable meter boxes will be required on all hose connections designated for reclaimed water. All distribution and application facilities located on private properties, including residential properties, shall be color-coded using Pantone Purple 522. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-310. - Minimum sized reclaimed water mains and service lines. 
The minimum size of reclaimed water system mains installed by customer shall be supported by hydraulic analysis (and future water use) as applicable. The minimum size of mains installed by customer shall be six inches in diameter. The customer shall determine the exact size of reclaimed water main required subject to approval of the director or city engineer. Service lines shall be at least one inch in diameter. The customer shall determine the exact size of service line required subject to approval of the director. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-311. - Extension approval. 
Proposed reclaimed water system extensions shall be approved by the city through the director. Applications to install reclaimed water extensions shall be submitted to city engineer for approval prior to construction. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-312. - Right to refuse service. 
No payment of costs, submittal of an application, or other act to receive reclaimed water service shall guarantee such service. The city shall have the right, at all times, to refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the system, inadequate supply of reclaimed water, lack of payment of required fees, or for failure to satisfy any of the design, material, or other specifications developed by the director which specifications are available for review at the department. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-313. - Hydrants. 
Hydrants may be installed on reclaimed water mains constructed within the city at such locations as deemed appropriate by the director. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-314. - Extent of city maintenance. 
(a)  All facilities and appurtenances from the reclaimed water main to the customer side of the meter connection that have been accepted by the city shall become the property of the city and will be operated and maintained by the city. No person shall perform any work on, nor be reimbursed for any work on, the system without written authorization of the director prior to commencement of the work. 
(b)  The city shall make a reasonable effort to inspect and keep the facilities and appurtenances from the reclaimed water main to the customer side of the meter connection in good repair but assumes no liability for any damage caused by the system that is beyond the control of normal maintenance or due to situations not reported to or known by the city in sufficient time to cause repairs including, but specifically not limited to, damage due to breaking of pipes, poor quality of water caused by unauthorized or illegal entry of foreign material into the system, and faulty operation of fire protection facilities. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-315. - Maintenance by the customer. 
The property owner and/or the customer shall be responsible for the proper connection to the customer side of the meter and maintenance of all reclaimed water systems or appurtenances connected to the city's reclaimed water system for the purpose of serving the property owner/customer. The city reserves the right to disconnect service to any property on which an irrigation system or other user system of reclaimed water is not permitted and/or properly maintained. In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water at different pressures, or different quality, or in any way different from that normally supplied by the city, the customer shall be responsible for the necessary devices to make these adjustments; provided, however, that such devices shall require the prior approval of the director. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-316. - Tapping and connection. 
(a)  Permission must be obtained from the city to connect to the existing reclaimed water service leads at the meter box. The city shall install or have installed all service connections from the water main to the meter box. Payment for service connections must be made before the work is started. 
(b)  Additional charges. 
(1)  Additional charges shall be paid at the time of making application for tapping and making connections with the reclaimed water main to where a meter box and service lead were not previously installed. The charge shall include the tapping of the water main, corporation cocks, the installation of a meter and meter box. 
(2)  The city shall furnish the meter, meter boxes and backflow device and corporations for reclaimed water services from the point of reclaimed water main to the customers connection point and may charge for such furnishing and installation according to a schedule of fees therefore to be established by ordinance by the city council. All charges according to the schedule shall be paid when applying for service. 
(c)  Shutoff valve. Every service line shall be provided by the customer with an easily accessible and fully protected shutoff valve on the discharge side of the service connection. 
(d)  Liability for escaping water. The city shall not be responsible for maintenance of or for damage caused by water escaping from the service pipe or any other pipe or fixture on the outlet side of the service connection. 
(e)  Liability for service. The liability of the customer shall begin on the day the customer's line is connected to the city's service line and shall continue thereafter unless disconnected for nonpayment or other cause or until written notice is given the city by the customer to terminate the service. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-317. - Discontinuing service—By city. 
(a)  The city may discontinue reclaimed water service to any customer due to an infraction of these procedures and regulations, nonpayment of bills, for tampering with any service, for plumbing cross connections with another water source, or for any reason that may be detrimental to the system. The city has the right to cease service until the condition is corrected and all costs due the city are paid. These costs may include delinquent billings, connection charges, and payment for any damage caused to the system. Should discontinued service be turned on without authorization, the department shall remove the service and make an additional charge as provided by article. 
(b)  The provisions of article relating to notices, appeals, fees, and penalties shall apply to the discontinuation of reclaimed water service by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-318. - Same—By customer. 
There shall be no fee for discontinuing reclaimed water service. All current bills shall be paid by the customer including a bill for the use during the current billing period prior to discontinuation of service. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-319. - Service interruption. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire reclaimed water system as deemed necessary by the director. 
(b)  The director shall have the authority to establish schedules which restrict the use of the reclaimed water system at certain times in order to reduce maximum pressure demands on the system and to regulate usage during periods of limited reclaimed water availability. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-320. - City responsibility. 
The city will reasonably attempt to deliver an adequate supply of reclaimed water at all times. However, no assurances or guarantees shall be provided to customers or to others regarding the quantity or quality of the water due to circumstances beyond their control. Until the city's reclaimed/reuse water system is fully functional and able to serve customers, the city shall provide potable water to customers approved for reclaimed water service under the terms of this article. The charge for potable water use under this section is the same charge for water usage generally in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-321. - Applications for reclaimed water service. 
Applications for reclaimed water service shall be filed in the utility customer service office of the finance department, upon forms to be provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-322. - Location. 
The location of reclaimed water service lines and points of delivery to private property shall be determined by the city, but in no instance shall be closer than five feet from the potable water service line. The normal location of the reclaimed water point of delivery including meter is behind the right-of-way line on the property being served or within a dedicated easement to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-323. - Customer responsibility. 
(a)  No hose bibbs shall be included in any irrigation system provided by the customer. No system with a cross connection to the potable water system shall be approved for connection to the reclaimed water system. Customer systems shall not include devices, faucets, or other connections that could permit the reclaimed water to be used for any purpose other than irrigation unless such uses and systems have been approved in writing by the director. 
(b)  All reclaimed water systems constructed by customer(s) in areas where the city has determined to make reclaimed water available shall require a permit and shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and regulations established by the city. The customer shall provide the city with a schematic drawing of the system, when required. 
(c)  Reclaimed water service lines to single-family customers may include a special hose bibb connection installed by the city downstream of the master valve and below ground in a lockable meter box. The customer shall insure that any consumption from the hose bibb is used for nonpotable purposes. 
(d)  All customers connecting to the reclaimed system for air conditioning system coolant water shall be required to have a potable water system backup in place, including proper backflow protection. Additionally, all customers proposing to use reclaimed water in industrial applications, including cooling towers, must provide certification by an engineer that this usage is in compliance with City of Loganville Department of Water Quality Control, Reuse of Reclaimed Water and Land Application and Georgia EPD rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-324. - Meter requirements. 
(a)  The city will require reclaimed water meters for all customers using reclaimed water. 
(b)  Appropriately sized meters shall be required for all commercial, industrial, bulk and multifamily dwelling unit uses as determined by the director. 
(c)  Bulk rate users are required to pay for all meter and installation costs to the extent such costs are not included in any tap fees charged by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-325. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  In all premises where reclaimed water service is provided, the public potable water supply shall be protected from actual or potential cross connections by a backflow prevention device. All such devices shall be provided and installed by the city, and shall remain the property of the city. Where any cross connection is found, service shall be disconnected. 
(b)  To determine the presence of any potential hazards to the public potable water system, the city shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any customer receiving reclaimed water. Each customer of reclaimed water service shall, by application or by use of service, be deemed to have given implied consent to such entry upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-326. - Use of potable water for irrigation prohibited. 
No person shall use potable water for irrigation on property where reclaimed water distribution facilities have been made available. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-327. - Irrigation wells. 
No person shall install a irrigation well within the designated designed service territory boundaries of the city's reclaimed water system to serve property. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-2015(3)) 
Sec. 34-328. - Shallow potable wells. 
(a)  The city shall not provide reclaimed water service where shallow wells, the existence of which is known by the city, are a source of potable water and where buffer zone requirements of the City of Loganville cannot be maintained. 
(b)  No person shall install a shallow well intended for use as a source of potable water for property where reclaimed water and potable water connections are available. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-329. - Chemical injections. 
No person shall inject any chemical into a reclaimed water system service connection serving residential property. Other users wishing to use chemical injection into the reclaimed water system shall be required to pay the costs for the city to provide and install an approved cross connection control assembly on the reclaimed and potable water service connections. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-330. - Price and payment for use of reclaimed/reuse water/availability. 
(a)  The customer shall pay the City of Loganville such meter and tap connection fees and rates and under such terms as set forth in the City of Loganville Code of Ordinances. The City of Loganville shall read the reclaimed/reuse water meter(s) at least monthly consistent with the city's normal meter reading schedule and billed in accordance with the City of Loganville standard billing practices. 
(b)  The utility account of any improved property adjacent to a sufficiently sized reclaimed water distribution main shall include a monthly availability charge to alleviate the capital outlay of extending accessibility to the reclaimed water system. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-331. - Incentives. 
(a)  The overall objective is to maximize usage of reclaimed water and to lessen the impact of effluent discharge into Big Flat Creek. 
(b)  Due to utilities charges being a premium for peak usage of potable water, the mayor and council, may in turn to all customers willing to abandon a private well, lake or pond irrigation system or a potable water service irrigation system and connect to the reclaimed water system during construction of the reuse system could be offered an incentive by providing price incentives for the use of recycled water through reduced rates. 
(c)  The customer would need to successfully demonstrate their reuse usage demand would consume a minimum use requirement set by mayor and council or 40 percent of the normal water use from the city potable water system usage. 
(d)  The rate incentive would need to be approved and determined by the mayor and council before any incentive could be applied to the customers utility account. 
(e)  The overall objective is to maximize usage of reclaimed water and to lessen the impact of effluent discharge into Big Flat Creek. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-332. - Process use. 
Reclaimed water service may be provided as a source of water for cooling and miscellaneous process applications. However, reclaimed water may not be piped into any building used for residential purposes. All applicants for service shall be reviewed by the director who shall approve such service. Any effluent reclaimed water from cooling and/or process use must be discharged to the sanitary sewer and must meet all city, state and federal discharge regulations. A sewer charge for processing of said discharge will be applied in addition to the cost of the reclaimed water. Any discharge to the city's sanitary system must meet the city's minimum pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-333. - Runoff control. 
Customers shall be responsible for the operation of their private reclaimed water systems in a prudent manner to ensure that neither ponding, nor runoff from the system occurs. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-334. - Reclaimed water use restrictions. 
To conserve the resource, the city may enforce no irrigation by use of reclaimed water during certain hours of each day of the week. When applied, reclaimed water should be used only to the extent necessary for irrigation needs of lawns, gardens and individual plants. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-335. - General terms. 
(a)  All applications for reclaimed water service shall describe the nonpotable water uses requested by the applicant. Customers may not resell reuse water delivered by the city to any other person or legal entity. Customers are also prohibited from conveying reuse water delivered by the city to any other premises or locations. 
(b)  Maximum obtainable separation of reclaimed water lines and potable water lines shall be practiced. A minimum horizontal separation of three feet (outside of pipe to outside of pipe) shall be maintained between reclaimed water lines and either potable water mains or sewage collection lines. A minimum of 18 inches shall be provided between the bottom of any potable water supply line and the top of the reuse line. 
(c)  All reclaimed water valves and outlets should be appropriately tagged or embossed to warn public and employees that the water is not intended for drinking. 
(d)  The customer shall have installed a permanent underground irrigation system. 
(e)  The city will offer a public information program to inform designated users and the public of what reclaimed water is and to answer questions about connecting to the system. All designated users wishing to connect to the system must participate in the public information program and have their participation documented. The City of Loganville will provide this information. 
(f)  As-built plans of a customer's reclaimed water system, showing valve locations, tap locations, and size of taps, shall be prepared and available to the City of Loganville at all times. 
(g)  The customer shall not allow the reclaimed water to enter any dwelling unit(s). 
(h)  The customer shall sign a written user agreement with the City of Loganville prior to tapping on to the reuse system. 
(i)  The customer shall not allow reclaimed water to be used for consumption (human or animal), interconnecting with another water source, sprinkling of edible crops (gardens), body contact recreation, filling of swimming pools, or sharing a common reclaimed service between properties. 
(j)  Posting of signs and other prominent notification methods shall be used by the customer(s) to ensure that any and all persons associated, employed, or otherwise connected with the property utilizing the reuse water are aware of the fact that reuse water is being utilized on the property and it is nonpotable. 
(k)  Operation and maintenance of the reclaimed water system on the customers' property including valves, outlets, couplers, and sprinkler heads shall be performed by personnel who have completed the public information educational program(s). 
(l)  Precautions shall be taken to ensure that reclaimed water will not be sprayed on any facility or area not designated for application. Low trajectory nozzles, or other means to minimize aerosol formation shall be used within 100 feet of public eating, drinking, and bathing facilities. 
(m)  Malfunctioning irrigation systems and line breaks shall be repaired immediately by the customer(s). Improper operation allowing runoff during irrigation may be grounds to shut off service to the customer. 
(n)  Privately owned and operated tank trucks and other portable equipment that is used to distribute reclaimed water shall be clearly identified with reclaimed or nonpotable water signs. The truck used to transport and distribute reclaimed water may not be used to transport potable water that is used for drinking purposes. 
(o)  Use through hose bibbs or faucets are only allowed on a very limited case-by case basis, and are typically not allowed for residential use. If allowed, hoses and hose bibbs shall be through cam-lock connection assemblies to be provided by the customer at the location specified by the city. Specific provisions must be made in any reuse written user agreements to ensure that reclaimed water is used strictly for irrigation purposes and will not be utilized for any of the restricted items identified these guidelines. Runoff of reclaimed water into ditches or streams should be avoided. 
(p)  Application of reclaimed water for agricultural irrigation of crops not intended for direct human consumption will be considered by City of Loganville on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-336. - Indemnity. 
The customer agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City of Loganville, Georgia, its officers, agents, servants, employees from all suits, actions, losses, damages, claims, or liability, penalties, and expenses of any character, type or description, including without limitation any fines, penalties and costs or damages whatsoever growing out of any action taken by any governmental entity or regulatory authority, department or agency of any governmental entity or any other person, including citizens suits against the City of Loganville for alleged noncompliance with laws, rules or regulations, whether relating to the environment or otherwise and including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all expenses of litigation, court costs, attorneys fees, damages for injury, death or property damage sustained by any person or persons arising out of or occasioned by the acts of the customer, its officers, agents, employees or representatives or customer's breach of the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 34-337. - Violation; penalties. 
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine for each offense, or violation not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment not to exceed 60 days for each offense or violation. Additionally, any person violating any provision of this chapter may be liable to pay restitution in the discretion of the court for: 
(1)  The total cost incurred by the city to repair or replace facilities damaged as a result of the violation. 
(2)  Any injury or damage to person or property or loss of services resulting from the violation. 
(3)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this article, including Georgia Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or both. 
(4)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article, including Georgia Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(5)  In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(6)  The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this article shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2011, § 1) 
Secs. 34-338—34-365. - Reserved. 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND RELATED ORDINANCES 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land development regulations, provisions in subpart A of this Code may also pertain to land development. The failure to include provisions in this subpart does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 103-1. - Purpose, intent and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes for Construction as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and any such optional codes as may be adopted by the city council. Hereinafter, the state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes". 
(b)  Intent. 
(1)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection/no warranty. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. This article and the construction codes shall not create any duty or right of recovery against the city or any of its officials or employees 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. 
These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  International Existing Building Code. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as approved and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, as approved and amended, shall apply and be enforced within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
(12)  Standard Swimming Pool Code. The provisions of the Standard Swimming Pool Code, as amended, shall apply to the protection of the health, safety and welfare by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction, installation, repair or alterations of swimming pools, public or private, and equipment related thereto. 
(d)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(e)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(f)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-2. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-3. - Building department. 
There shall be created within and as a part of the department of planning and development the building department. The city manager or designee is appointed the building official to enforce this article and the construction codes. The governing body shall establish the qualifications for the building official(s) and other code enforcement personnel. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by section 103-11 shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his or her duties, or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of a board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-4. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  In general. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretation, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of the construction codes. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in the codes. 
(b)  Deputies. The building official shall have the authority to appoint deputy building officials, the related technical officers, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. 
(c)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, and inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of the codes. 
(d)  Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices of orders to ensure compliance with the codes. 
(e)  Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall have the authority to accept reports of inspections by approved agencies or individuals if the required inspection cannot be accomplished by city personnel within two business days following the inspection request. Reports of inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise. 
(f)  Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures and premises in the performance of duties under this Code. 
(g)  Right of entry. Any owner, applicant or authorized agent, upon submitting a request for a permit or by accepting a permit issued pursuant to the construction codes or this article, shall be deemed to have agreed and consented to allowing the building official or authorized representative to conduct an inspection to enforce any provisions of the construction codes. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(h)  Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the construction codes, the building official shall have the authority to grant modification for individual cases, upon application of owner or owners representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the codes impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the code and that such modification does not lessen the health, accessibility, life and fire safety or structural requirements. The details of granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the building department. 
(i)  Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by the codes, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed alternative is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the codes, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the codes is quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(1)  Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in the construction codes, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
(2)  Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the construction codes, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the codes, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made as no expense to the city. Test methods shall be as specified in the construction codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Test shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such test shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-5. - Permits. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure including fences, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the construction codes or of any other laws or ordinance of the city. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Retaining walls not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding class I, II or IIIA liquids. 
b.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
c.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinetry, counter tops and similar finish work. 
d.  Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery. 
e.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground. 
f.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or horticultural purposes, not including service systems. 
g.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
h.  For Group R-3 and U occupancies, window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
i.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches in height. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Minor repair work including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions but not equipment and wiring for a power supply or the installation of towers and antennae. 
c.  Temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
c.  Portable cooling unit. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the gas code. 
e.  Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make is unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
(5)  Plumbing. 
a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste, or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this Code. 
b.  The clearing or stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacement and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation to prevent injury, loss or damage to persons or property, the permit application shall be submitted to the building official no later than the next business day. 
(d)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waster, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(e)  Information required. Each application for a permit shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his/her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(f)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reason for rejection. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of all applicable codes, laws and ordinances, he or she shall issue a permit as soon as practicable. The initial review of applications and constructions documents shall be completed no later than 30 days after date of application. 
(g)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(h)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after is issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for period not more than six months each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(i)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or provision of this Code. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(j)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(k)  Payment of fees required. A permit shall not be issued until all fees, as established periodically by the city council, have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(l)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of two times the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-6. - Construction documents. 
(a)  Submittal documents. Construction documents, statement of special inspections and other data shall be submitted in three or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by statute. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
(1)  Exception. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the construction codes. 
(2)  Information required. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the construction codes and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. 
(b)  Site plan. The construction documents submitted with an application for a permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. The building official is authorized to waive or modify this requirement when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
(c)  Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances. If the building official is unable to complete the initial review of the construction documents within 30 days of the date of application, then he or she shall allow for review by a private professional provider in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(g)(1). 
(1)  Approval of documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved by stamp as "Reviewed for generally conformity to building construction standards." One set so reviewed shall be retained by the building official for the period as required by state or local statue but in no case less than six months. One set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the work site and shall be open to inspection by the building official or authorized representative. 
(2)  Phased approvals. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the construction codes. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(d)  Design professional in responsible charge. 
(1)  General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. 
(2)  Duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased or deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(3)  Special inspections. Where structural observation is required by the construction codes, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. 
(e)  Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-7. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Construction work for which a permit is issued shall be subject to inspection by the building official and it shall be the duty of the permit holder to cause such construction or work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the codes or of other ordinances of the city. Neither the building official, nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(b)  Required inspections. The building official is authorized to make or require all inspections necessary to ascertain compliance with the construction codes and with the technical requirements of any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. A list of required inspections shall be prepared and disseminated by the building official to permit applicants. 
(c)  Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved private professional provider meeting the qualification requirements of and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(g)(1). 
(d)  Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their duly authorized representative to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection and to provide access to and means for required inspections of such work. 
(e)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. Upon notification, the building official shall make the requested inspection within two business days and shall either indicate the portion of construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the construction codes or other ordinances. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-8. - Certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(a)  Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure of portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion for the work authorized by a permit. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the construction codes of other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall specify a time period for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid. 
(c)  Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(1)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-9. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the construction codes, or cause the same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any provisions of the codes. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve, or cause to have served by an authorized representative, notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the construction codes, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under this chapter or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(c)  Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with within a reasonable period, the building official is authorized to initiate the appropriate proceedings to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the construction codes or of the order or direction made pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of violating this article and the construction codes. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the construction codes is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-10. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated under the construction codes being performed in an manner either contrary to the provisions of the codes or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed by the building official to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to penalties as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-11. - Appeals. 
(a)  General. Authority to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official shall rest with the city council. At its discretion, the city council may, by ordinance, delegate its authority to a board of appeals, appointed by the city council and holding office at its pleasure. A board of appeals so created shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. Members of a board of appeals shall be qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and shall not be employees of the city. 
(b)  Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the construction code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the codes do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The council or board of appeals shall have no authority to waive requirements of the construction codes. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(d)  Timely hearing. Following a written notice of appeal, the building official shall forward the matter to the city council or board of appeals for consideration at the next available regularly scheduled business meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(2), § 1) 
Secs. 103-12—103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 10, 2010 amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 103-19—103-127, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1994, §§ 16-108, 16-109; and Ord. of 10-11-2011(4), §§ 1—6. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 103-19. - Definitions. 
Terms not defined herein shall have their meaning as defined in the zoning regulations, the development regulations, and the construction code, or in the absence of such definition, words shall have their common dictionary definition. Whenever the terms "dwelling unit," "premises," "building," "roominghouse," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and development or the designee thereof. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable space means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Junk vehicle means any vehicle, automobile, truck, van, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance or part thereof, which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, stripped, partially stripped, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping property, structures or vegetation in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline, failure or uncontrolled growth. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant means any individual living or sleeping in a building or having possession of a space within a building. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property or recorded in the official records of the state or the county as holding title to the property or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term "rubbish" shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Toilet room means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Trash means combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage, including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, cans, metals, bricks, lumber, concrete, mineral matter, glass crockery, and including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible material. 
Vacant lot means a lot on which a development or land disturbance permit has been issued and there are no permanent buildings. 
Weeds means all rank vegetative growth including but not limited to, kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables, and gardens. 
Yard trimmings means all leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping or maintenance activities. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010; Ord. of 6-9-2011(2), § 1) 
Sec. 103-20. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  Powers of the court. The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this article, and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements and standards for premises and structures in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, order and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-22. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all existing structures and premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for existing structures and premises. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-23. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the city manager or by his duly authorized designee. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-24. - Notice of violation. 
Enforcement shall begin with a written notice of violation provided to the owner or occupant. The notice may be delivered personally or sent by first class mail. The notice shall contain a deadline for compliance which may be extended by the director. If the violation continues past the deadline, the city manager or his duly authorized designee shall institute legal proceedings charging the person, firm, corporation or agent with a violation of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions: 
a.  Any owner, agent, successor in title, occupant or resident of any premises upon which two or more violation notices have been issued for the same violation within a 24-month period will be cited for willful neglect of the provisions of this article in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Secs. 103-25—103-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 103-52. - Fences and walls. 
Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences shall be free from loose or rotting materials and shall have braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-53. - Maintenance of grass, weeds and uncultivated vegetation. 
(a)  Maximun height of vegetation. Premises, exterior property, and vacant lots shall be maintained free from grass, weeds or uncultivated vegetation in excess of 12 inches in height. 
(b)  Notice to remove. Before being cited for violating section, it shall be the duty of an enforcement officer designated by the city manager to notify in writing the owner, agent, successor in title or occupant or resident of any premises upon which weeds or other prohibited flora are growing or are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section. The owner, agent, successor in title, occupant or resident is to be notified by such writing that he has five days from the date of the notice to remove, cut, or destroy the growth. Such notification shall be by hand delivery by city designee or by registered mail, receipt requested, and addressed to the owner, agent, successor in title, occupant or resident at the last known address or by hand delivery to the resident of the site or residence where the prohibitive growth is located. 
(1)  Exceptions: 
a.  The owner, agent or successor in title to vacant/abandoned structures or property is to be notified by such writing that he has ten days from the date of the notice to remove, cut, or destroy the growth. Such notification shall be by hand delivery by city designee or by registered mail, receipt requested, and addressed to the owner, agent or successor in title at the last known address or by hand delivery to the residence where the prohibitive growth is located. 
(c)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon a violation of this section resulting from the willful failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, agent, successor in title, occupant or resident after being properly notified to remove, cut and/or destroy the weeds, grass or other unsightly growths of flora within the designated time period, the enforcement officer designated by the city manager is authorized and empowered to provide for the removal, cutting and/or destruction of the growth of weeds, grass and/or flora by or on behalf of the city. 
(d)  Cost of removal. The cost of the removal of weeds, grass or flora shall be assessed against the property owner, agent, successor in title upon whose premises the work is done, and the city shall have the right to cite the owner, agent, successor in title for being in violation of this section and to fine the owner, agent, successor in title, occupant or resident in conformity with the Charter of the city. 
(e)  Lien. If any assessment made against the property of an owner or successor in title remains unpaid for 30 days after being assessed and after notice being given in conformity with this section, the amount shall then become a lien upon the premises and be enforceable upon the premises in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010; Ord. of 6-9-2011(2), § 2) 
Sec. 103-54. - Junk vehicles; exceptions. 
(a)  Junk vehicles shall not be kept, permitted, parked, stored or maintained on any premises or public street right-of-way. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Junk vehicles, limited to a maximum of two, which are kept within a fully enclosed building on property in residential zoning districts provided the owner or occupant of the property is in the process of reconditioning the junk vehicles for personal use. 
(2)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts authorized by the zoning resolutions for repairing, reconditioning or remodeling junk vehicles, and provided that such junk vehicles are not stored for the purpose of salvage of parts but are in the continual process of repair, reconditioning or remodeling. 
(3)  Junk vehicles which are kept on property in zoning districts as authorized by the zoning regulations for a junk or salvage yard. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-55. - Open or outdoor storage. 
(a)  The open or outdoor storage of appliances, building materials or rubbish, equipment, garbage, goods, glass, materials, merchandise, rubbish, trash or similar items shall not be permitted, maintained or stored on any premises for more than 24 hours. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning regulations; 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths, not to exceed three feet, for the personal use of the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-56. - Storage of junk. 
(a)  Use of trailers for storage prohibited. It is unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city to permit the use of transfer trailers or similar type conveyances to be used for storage facilities. 
(b)  Abatement of nuisance by property owner after notice. The owner of any personal property located within the city which constitutes a nuisance shall abate such nuisance within ten days after receiving notice from the city of the existence of such nuisance and a request that it be abated. Abatement of such nuisance shall be done by prompt removal of the personal property into a completely enclosed building authorized to be used for such storage purposes, to a location outside the city limits, or into a junkyard, or by the restoration of the personal property to a condition legally usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured or originally intended. 
(c)  Abatement of nuisance by city. When a nuisance has not been abated within ten days, the city may, but shall not be required to, remove or cause to be removed the personal property from such location where it is stored to a location selected by the city. The expense for the removal and any expense incurred in connection with the storage thereof shall be paid by the owner, and such expenses shall be a lien against the personal property, having the same weight as a levy for taxes. 
(d)  Disposition of junk after removal by city. 
(1)  Sale. Personal property so removed or caused to be removed by the city may be sold by the city at any time after 30 days from its removal. 
(2)  Notice to owner. Notice, after which the property may be sold, of the time, date and place of the sale of the personal property shall be given to the owner, if known, by certified or registered mail sent to the owner's address or by personally delivering notice to the owner or the owner's residence at least ten days prior to such sale date. If the owner of the personal property cannot be readily determined after reasonable effort has been made, notice shall be given by publication of such notice once a week for two successive weeks prior to the sale date in a newspaper where sheriff's sales are advertised, which notice shall contain a general description of the personal property, the date, time and place of the proposed sale, and the location from which the sale will be conducted, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a prominent place at the city hall. 
(3)  Distribution of proceeds. The proceeds from the sale of such personal property shall be applied first toward any expenses incurred by the city in the renewal, storage and sale of same, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner if the owner can be located and identified, or, if the owner after reasonable effort cannot be located, such balance shall be deposited in the city treasury for the general use of the city at the expiration of 12 months following the sale. 
(4)  Collection of deficit. If the proceeds from the sale are insufficient to pay the cost and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the removal, storage and sale, the deficiency shall constitute a claim against the owner and may be collected by the city by lawsuit or other available legal means. 
(e)  Procedure upon objection to city action. 
(1)  Filing of written objection. At any time after notice as provided in subsection (b) of this section and prior to sale as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the owner or any other person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever in such personal property may make a statement in writing and file same with the city clerk, which statement shall contain any legal or equitable defense that may be available to such person to oppose the action or proposed action of the city. 
(2)  Hearing. Upon the receipt of such written statement, the city clerk shall advise the council of same and a hearing shall be held before the council at the next regular council meeting, notice of the time, date and place of which shall be given by the city clerk to such person, to determine the merits of the allegations contained in such written statement. After such hearing the council may order that the proceedings relating to the junk in question proceed or be terminated, or they may take such other action as may be appropriate in connection therewith. 
(3)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the order or action of the council may appeal their decision in the same manner as provided under state law for appeals to the probate court. 
(f)  Abandoned motor vehicles. For the purposes of this section, an "abandoned motor vehicle" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. shall be considered "junk"; provided, however, that as to any such abandoned motor vehicle the city shall, in addition to complying with the provisions of this section, comply with all provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. to the extent such code provisions are applicable and relevant to the city. 
(g)  Determination of existence of nuisances. For the purposes of this section, if a factual issue exists as to whether or not there is a nuisance, as defined herein, the city may proceed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. in addition to any other remedies that may be available to the city, either under the provisions of this section or otherwise. 
(h)  Misdemeanor. The creation of a nuisance as herein defined, the continuation of such a nuisance, or the failure to abate such a nuisance within ten days after being requested in writing to do so by the city, by any person, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(i)  Summary abatement; liability. Personal property which is on public or private property which is so located or of condition as to create a present and immediate danger to the public, or which is a public nuisance as provided by state law, may, in the discretion of the city, be removed without prior notice. After removal, any further proceeding in connection with such personal property shall be as herein provided. The city shall not be liable for not removing such personal property. The city shall not be liable for any damage which may be done to such personal property in connection with its removal and storage. No action or lack of action by the city shall relieve any owner or other person of any liability or responsibility for creating a public or private nuisance or for moving such junk so as to eliminate any such present and immediate danger or public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-57. - Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to persons on adjacent property or to adjacent property. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death or impending death of the tree, or due to damage by weather conditions or due to disease infestation. 
(b)  Tree stumps. 
(1)  Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than 30 days after the tree has been cut. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
a.  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
b.  Property one acre or greater in size; 
c.  Property zoned R-44. 
(c)  Tree debris. 
(1)  Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than 30 days. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
a.  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
b.  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet; 
c.  Property one acre or greater in size; 
d.  Property zoned R-44. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-58. - Swimming pools. 
Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. A finding by the code enforcement department shall constitute prima facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Secs. 103-59—103-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 103-90. - Exterior surface treatment. 
All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather-resistant and watertight. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-91. - Exterior walls. 
Exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface-coated as needed to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-92. - Roofs. 
Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof including, but not limited to, the fascia, eave, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, or lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-93. - Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies. 
Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-94. - Windows. 
Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass window panes or with a substitute approved by the director of the department of planning and development, which are without open cracks or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-95. - Exterior property area. 
(a)  All premises and vacant structures shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(b)  Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-96. - Decorative features. 
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-97. - Boarding up buildings. 
Boarding-up permits. 
(1)  No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first obtaining a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this article. Any properties with boards existing at the time of the adoption of this article will have 60 days from the date of the ordinance's adoption to submit an application to the office of code enforcement for a permit to continue to board. 
(2)  The office of code enforcement is authorized to prepare the necessary application forms for a boarding-up permit which shall include the owner's name, address and telephone number; the name, address and telephone number of any other responsible party or local representative of the owner; the common address of the property as well as the tax map, map block and parcel tax identification. The office of code enforcement is further authorized to establish a fee schedule so as to enable the city to offset its reasonable expenses in reviewing the application and monitoring the boarding up process. 
(3)  The office of code enforcement may issue a boarding-up permit only upon satisfaction that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Submission of a written application by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
b.  Payment of the required fee by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
c.  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the building, structure, and/or lot is in compliance with all applicable code requirements; and 
d.  Submission of a written statement of plan by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative specifying: 
1.  The length of time the owner expects the boarding up to continue; and 
2.  The proposed rehabilitation, maintenance, improvements, and/or demolition to be made to the property so as to make it suitable for its intended use. 
A boarding-up permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall authorize the boarding up or other securing of a building or structure for a period of three months. 
(4)  An owner of a property desiring to continue to board his/her property beyond the three-month term authorized by subsection (2) must submit a written application to the mayor and council 15 business days prior to the expiration of his/her boarding-up permit. The mayor and council may authorize the owner of the property to continue to board for a period of time of its discretion only upon satisfaction that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  A showing by the owner of the property that failure to grant the additional time to board would result in exceptional hardship to the owner of the property; 
b.  Payment of the required fee by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
c.  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the building, structure, and/or lot is in compliance with all applicable code requirements; and 
d.  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the boarding up or other method of securing the building or structure is in compliance with section 103-98. 
(5)  No boarding-up permit shall be required to board up a building or structure for up to 30 days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including, but not limited to, damage caused by vandalism, theft or weather. In the event an emergency situation requires a building or structure to be boarded up for more than 30 days, the owner of the building or structure or his/her authorized representative must obtain a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with subsection 103-97(3)a. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-98. - Standards for securing building or structure. 
(a)  The boarding of doors, windows or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall be according to the specifications approved by the office of code enforcement. 
(b)  All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of two coats of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-99. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 103-20 of the Loganville Code of Ordinances. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  If the owner fails to appear at any hearing scheduled in regard to a citation issued pursuant to this article, the city is authorized to proceed to secure the building or structure so that it will not become open to the general public. The amount of the cost of such work shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and the city shall have the right to cite the owner for being in violation of this section and to fine the owner in conformity with the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-100. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The council members of the city find and determine that graffiti is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance that is destructive of the right and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Graffiti promotes blight in the neighborhoods in which it occurs and must be abated so as to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the city and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. Without prompt removal of graffiti, other properties become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places to live and work. It is further the intent of the city council to give notice to all who disregard the property rights of others that the city will strictly enforce all laws prohibiting graffiti. 
(b)  Public nuisance. The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti anywhere within the boundaries of the city is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this section and other applicable laws. 
(c)  Definitions. 
(1)  "Graffiti" is defined according to O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2 as, "any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on a surface." 
(2)  "Occupant" means any person or sub-lessee, successor or assignee that has control over property. 
(3)  "Owner" means any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property and includes but is not limited to: 
a.  A mortgagor in possession in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises; or 
b.  An occupant who has control over the property. 
(4)  "Permit" means to knowingly suffer, allow to acquiesce by any failure, refusal or neglect to abate. 
(5)  "Property" means any real or personal property and that which is affixed incidental or appurtenant to real property but not limited to any premises, house, building, fence, structure or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not. 
(d)  Prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to apply graffiti as defined herein. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property to permit graffiti on property. 
(e)  Graffiti notice of removal. When the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti, the city manager or his/her designee may serve a written notice directing the owner or occupant to remove such graffiti and advising of the appeal procedure. The notice required by this section may be served in person or by U.S. Mail, return receipt requested. If the owner or occupant cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for three days. 
(f)  Abatement of nuisance. Unless an appeal is taken, it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant to fail to remove the graffiti within five days of the date that notice to abate the graffiti is served if service is made in person or by certified mail. If service is made by posting the property, the owner or occupant shall remove the graffiti within five days of the first day that the property is posted. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the city council by the owner or occupant to prevent the removal of any graffiti, within five days of having received notice from the city that the graffiti must be removed. Appeals shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the appeal. If the party filing the appeal requests a hearing, such hearing shall be held at the next scheduled official meeting of the city council. If on appeal, the city council determines that graffiti must be removed, council may set a new deadline date for compliance or authorize the city to proceed to remove or obscure the graffiti. The city shall not remove or obscure any graffiti during the pendency of an appeal. 
(h)  Costs. 
(1)  If the graffiti is not completely abated by the owner or occupant of the premises within the time prescribed, and the appropriate party has not filed an appeal, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to cause the graffiti to be abated by city personnel or private contractor, and the city and its private contractor are expressly authorized to enter upon such premises for such purposes and remove such graffiti. 
(2)  The city shall keep an account of the costs and expenses incurred in abating graffiti and shall provide a statement of such costs to the person who received the notice to abate, and to the owner of the affected property. The owner and occupant of the premises shall be jointly liable to the city for all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti. If all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the graffiti and accounted for by the city remain unpaid after 30 days, the same shall constitute a lien upon the real property as provided in the city's nuisance ordinance. 
(3)  In lieu of making the cost of abating a nuisance a lien upon the real property, the city may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover all such expenses incurred by the city in removing the graffiti including attorney fees and court costs associated with the action. 
(i)  Penalty. Any person who is convicted of violating this section may be punished by a minimum fine of $500.00, not exceeding $1,000.00 per instance, and the amount of the costs to remove the graffiti. The court may suspend or probate a portion or its entire sentence upon such conditions to include, but not be limited to, the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(j)  Alternate means of enforcement. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law or city ordinance as an alternative, or in addition to, proceedings set forth in this section. 
(Ord. of 2-11-2010) 
Secs. 103-101—103-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 103-121. - Privacy. 
Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-122. - Minimum room widths. 
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than 7.5 feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-123. - Minimum ceiling heights. 
(a)  Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling height; 
(2)  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches, with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; 
(3)  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7.5 feet over not less than 50 percent of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-124. - Bedroom requirements. 
(a)  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(b)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-125. - Overcrowding. 
(a)  Minimum area. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements as follows: 
Minimum Occupancy Area Requirements 

 
(b)  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required in subsection (a) of this section shall not be included as sleeping area in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 103-124. 
(c)  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements in subsection (a) of this section if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms, and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-126. - Efficiency unit. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit an efficiency dwelling unit meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet. An efficiency unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet. These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (2) and (3) of this section. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(4)  The maximum number of occupants shall be three. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Sec. 103-127. - Occupancy not exceeding one week. 
This division shall not apply to any occupancy which has not lasted, or is not intended to last, more than one week. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2010) 
Secs. 103-128—103-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted June 14, 2012, amended div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 5, §§ 103-151—103-159, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 103-128, § 128, adopted Jan. 13, 2011. 

Sec. 103-151. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Within the city limits, there are buildings and structures that are vacant and pose a danger to the citizens of the city. Vacant structures are vulnerable to break-ins, criminal activity, destruction, fire, accidents, looting, and other unsafe activities that are injurious to the health, safety and welfare of persons who come on or near the property. 
(b)  In addition, vacant structures can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Vacant structures can attract and/or cause blight and other harmful effects to surrounding properties through lack of adequate maintenance and security. 
(c)  City officials often have difficulty locating the party responsible for the condition of vacant structures, so the city concludes that it is in the best interest of its citizens to impose registration requirements on such properties located within the city. 
(d)  Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by its Charter, the Code of Georgia, and its general police powers, the city has determined that it is in the best interest of its citizens and residents to impose requirements for the registration of vacant structures within the city and to ensure such properties are made safe and secure so as to protect the citizens of Loganville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-152. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings set out herein: 
(1)  Agent means an individual with a place of business in the State of Georgia at which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. 
(2)  City means the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
(3)  Code enforcement means the officer duly appointed by the governing authority of the city to enforce the ordinances of the city and who is authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
(4)  Days means consecutive calendar days. 
(5)  Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the city and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
(6)  Foreclosure means the process under O.C.G.A. tit. 44, art. VII, whereby a holder of a mortgage enforces its secured rights in property and takes title to the property to satisfy the underlying mortgage debt. 
(7)  Multi-unit structure means a building or structure where two or more businesses exist that operate under one certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  Municipal court means the Municipal Court of the City of Loganville. 
(9)  Owner means any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property, recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate or any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of the property by a court. 
(10)  Person means any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, corporation or trust. 
(11)  Property means any residential or commercial real property or portion thereof, situated in the city limits of Loganville, including any buildings or structures located thereon, regardless of condition. 
(12)  Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
(13)  Structure means any building, dwelling, or other improvement or part thereof, used and occupied for residential, commercial, industrial or other uses, or intended to be so used, including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto and usually enjoyed therewith. 
(14)  Vacant structure means a structure that: 
a.  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
b.  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-153. - Applicability/exemptions. 
The requirements of this section shall be applicable to each owner of property in the city limits on which any vacant structure is located, unless one of the following exemptions applies: 
(1)  Subject to active permit. 
a.  The structure is the subject of an active building permit for repair, rehabilitation or demolition; and 
b.  The owner is proceeding diligently in good faith to complete the repair, rehabilitation or demolition. 
(2)  Exemption of foreclosed property. The transferee shall not be required to register a foreclosed real property pursuant to this chapter when such real property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure, and: 
a.  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsection 103-154(3) of this chapter; 
b.  The deed is filed with the clerk of the superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
c.  Proof of the following is provided to the city code enforcement office: 
1.  Filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
2.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-154. - Registration of vacant structures. 
Unless exempt under section 103-153, all vacant structures located within the city shall be registered with the city code enforcement office. Registration requires submission of a completed registration application and receipt of all necessary fees. 
(1)  Any owner of property on which a vacant structure is located whose ownership predates the effective date of the ordinance from which this division derives, shall register the vacant structure with the city code enforcement office within 30 days after the city provides written notice of the existence of a vacant structure. 
(2)  No sooner than 90 but within 120 days of the effective date of the transfer of title to any property with a vacant structure located thereon, whether such transfer is by sale, gift, foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure, or other transfer, whether voluntary or involuntary, the new owner shall register the property with the city code enforcement office. 
(3)  The registration requirements of this division shall be satisfied by providing the city with the following information on an authorized registration application form provided by the city: 
a.  Name, direct street address (P.O. boxes are insufficient), mailing address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner. For purposes of this section, the following requirements shall apply dependent on the nature of the owner: 
1.  If the owner is a corporation, the registration application shall provide the names and residence addresses of all officers of the corporation; 
2.  If an estate, the name and business address of the executor or administrator of the estate; 
3.  If a trust, the name and address of the trustee; 
4.  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the general partner; 
5.  If an individual person, the name and residence address of that individual person. 
b.  If the property is managed, maintained or operated by a third party property management company or agent, the name, street address, mailing address, e-mail address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the agent or representative of the owner who is responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property; 
c.  Street address of the structure; 
d.  Tax parcel identification number of the property on which the structure is situated; 
e.  Transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; 
f.  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the property to the owner; and 
g.  An annual administrative registration fee in the amount set forth in section 103-158 shall be paid to the City of Loganville Office of Code Enforcement at the time of registration. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received no later than January 31st of the year due. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
(4)  Requirement to update information. Any owner that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration application to the city within 30 days of the change. Such notice shall include the name and address of any buyer or transferee of the property. Failure to report any change in such required information within 30 days shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 103-156. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-155. - Renewal of registration. 
Structures subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant. This registration must be renewed and the registration fee paid at the end of each year if the structure on the property is still vacant. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-156. - Penalties. 
Should the property owner fail to register a vacant structure or fail to update or renew a registration, the office of code enforcement may issue a citation and summons setting a hearing in municipal court. All persons found guilty are subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8 of the City Code per violation. No penalty shall exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-157. - Application for removal from registry. 
A real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove a property from the city vacant structure registry at such time as the property no longer contains a vacant structure. Such application may be submitted to the city code enforcement office. The city code enforcement officer shall grant or deny such application within 30 days. If no determination is made within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-158. - Fee structure. 
(a)  The city is authorized to collect fees to offset the cost of reviewing and approving the registration application and maintaining and operating the vacant structure registry. The registration fee for each property is $100.00. 
(b)  When a currently registered vacant property is transferred to a new owner, no administrative fee shall be due for the remainder of the calendar year for which the registration is current if the updated registration is submitted to the city within 30 days of the transfer. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 103-159. - Administrative procedures/appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the office of code enforcement to approve an application for removal from the vacant structure registry or by other enforcement of this chapter may appeal the denial or other determination by filing with the city manager's office, within ten business days after the date of the denial or other determination, a written notice of the appeal setting forth the grounds therefore. The city manager shall act upon the appeal within ten business days after its receipt by either affirming the decision of the code enforcement official or overturning the decision of the code enforcement official, with or without conditions. Within 30 days after the city manager's written decision, the person may appeal the decision to the municipal court, subject to applicable jurisdictional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 6-14-2012, § 1) 
Secs. 103-160—103-185. - Reserved. 
Chapter 105 - LAND DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 105-1. - Saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the Development Regulations of the City of Loganville, Georgia, adopted by ordinance on June 20, 2002, as amended. 
Chapter 107 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 14, 2009, amended ch. 107 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 107, §§ 107-1—107-98, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. of Mar. 13, 2003(6), § 24-101—24-107. 
State Law reference— Environment and natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager or designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), and all other flood-prone areas as referenced in section 107-7. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 107-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (i.e., the 100-year flood). 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operations centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants and other principal points of electric utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during the base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before March 6, 1979. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 6, 1979. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional home site by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a mobile home regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after March 6, 1979, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced after March 6, 1979 and includes and subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 6, 1979. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant, which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Start of construction. 
(1)  The term "start of construction" means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
(2)  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(3)  Permanent construction does not include: 
a.  Initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading or filling; 
b.  The installation of streets and/or walkways; 
c.  Excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations of the erection of temporary forms; 
d.  The installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or shed not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements. 
Structure means a walled or roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a building taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pad equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-2. - Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed greenspace areas. 
(b)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken of the expense of the general public; 
(5)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight; 
(6)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(7)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(8)  Insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood-prone area. 
(c)  Therefore, the city establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage is in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-3. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in subsection (c) of this section shall not prevent equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or other responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation, except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient. 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days, except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to sure such. 
(2)  Withholding certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or as otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fail to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00, depending on the severity of the violation, for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-4. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-5. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the city (i.e., floodplain and flood-prone areas) as defined herein, and all new or substantial improvement residential units, all subdivisions, nonresidential structures, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, and utilities located within these areas. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-6. - Compatibility. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other chapter, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for public health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-7. - Adoption of flood area maps and studies. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 29, 2006 (Gwinnett County) and May 18, 2009 (Walton County), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Corps of Engineers or the United States Geological Survey applicable to the city; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by the city. 
(b)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance studies, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the office of the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 107-9—107-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 107-35. - Designation of administrator. 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-36. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager or designee shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  To review all land development applications and permits to ensure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  To ensure that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the city manager or designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources in order to meet the provisions of subsections (4) and (5) of this section; 
(4)  To review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  To review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager of designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  To notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and to submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and the actual field conditions) the city manager or designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area geographically delineated on the floodplain maps. 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard area. 
All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city manager or designee and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-37. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities on a site where a floodplain is located, or is proposed to be altered or disturbed in any way, without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any owner or developer desiring a permit for a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  No land development permit will be approved for any land development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-38. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
(a)  No application for a land development project within any area of special flood hazard established in section 107-7 will be approved unless it includes a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section. 
(b)  This plan must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who will verify that all designs are consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all land development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all land development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and building activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(d)  The floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall include, but not be limited to, plans drawn to scale of the site in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage and stormwater management facilities. 
(e)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Site plan, including, but not limited to: 
a.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; 
c.  If available, the base flood elevation; and 
d.  If applicable, the location of the floodway. 
(2)  Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
b.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required by subsection 107-92(5); 
(3)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any substantial improvements to an existing nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in article IV of this chapter; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed land development project; and 
(5)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-39. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(a)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the city manager or designee a certified as-built plan showing the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(b)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of the certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager or designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-40. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it alleged an error in any requirement, decision or determination is made by the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Walton or Gwinnett County as provided by law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected my methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance will be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, or cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with other existing provisions of this Code. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction. Therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall be issued only upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city manager or designee shall maintain records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 107-41—107-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 107-69. - Floodplain elevations and boundaries. 
(a)  Studied zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish the base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For special flood hazard areas and flood-prone areas, the flood elevations shall be determined by a state-registered professional engineer using a method approved by the city. 
(c)  The boundaries or limits of the floodplain shall be within 0.5 feet vertical accuracy on the site plan containing existing topographic information. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-70. - Definition of floodway boundary. 
(a)  The width of the floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. 
(b)  Following a pre-design conference with the city, the boundaries or limits of the floodway shall be shown on the site plan containing the existing topographic information. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-71. - General standards. 
(a)  No construction or structures, including grading, filling, cutting or displacement of earth shall be allowed within the floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation beyond the boundaries of the ownership of the property being developed, unless contained in a drainage easement obtained by the developer; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood storage capacity. All compensation for storage capacity shall occur either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed or within a permanent, recorded flood control easement, and shall be within a reasonable proximity to the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain, or raising of the base flood elevation within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed. All cut areas are to be graded to a slope of no less than two percent. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel. A step-backwater analysis will be required to determine the volume of flood storage created by raising the base flood elevation; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics of the waters of the base flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the property, for which verification shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis; 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities; or 
(5)  Resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
In all cases effective transitions must be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased. 
(b)  All proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  Any significant changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys which demonstrate general conformance to the approved designs as submitted in the CLOMR application. A letter of map revision (LOMR) or letter of map amendment (LOMA) must be issued before the final plat can be approved or a certificate of occupancy can be issued. Significant changes or revisions shall be defined as any change to the FIRM easily observed when plotted at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet. The changes or revisions may be due to, but are not limited to, more current and/or superior topographic information or compensatory cut-and-fill grading done as a part of the development. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-72. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb the floodplain. This study shall be prepared by a currently-registered professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a method approved by the city. Cross sections, which may be supplemented by the applicant, and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun within the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to demonstrate that floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  If changes to the base flood elevation are proposed, profiles of the channel showing the existing and proposed base flood elevations; and 
(5)  A preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as applicable, which shall clearly define all floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-73. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the floodway, except when required for the construction of bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(2)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable, is issued by FEMA. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-74. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of the floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The city may direct the property owner at no cost to the city to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 107-75—107-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 107-92. - General requirements. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain; 
(2)  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  Substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces and exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding provided; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher that one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of the enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, and all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable stat requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-93. - Building standards—Within the floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation adjacent to the building. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107-92(5), pertaining to elevated buildings. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the floodplain. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE of AH zones may be authorized by the city manager of designee to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be designed and constructed to pass all floodwater in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(d)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect types of utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(3)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements of subsection (a)(2) of this section, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-94. - Same—Adjacent to floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the level of the highest base flood (100-year) elevation adjacent to the building. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the highest base flood (100-year) elevation adjacent to the building. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-95. - Same—Without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A zones) or with established base flood elevation without designated floodway (AE zones). 
(a)  Located within the areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones) and a floodway has not been delineated, the city manager or designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this section. If sufficient data are not available from these sources, then the then the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream, measured from the top of stream bank, or 20 feet, whichever is greater, unless certification is provided by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that such encroachment will not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  Substantial improvement of existing structures or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated not lower than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 107-92(5), pertaining to elevated buildings. 
(b)  In areas of special flood hazard where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (AE zones), no encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within these areas, unless certification is provided by a registered professional engineer demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. The engineering certification shall be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-96. - Same—Areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvement of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards for elevated buildings. The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the city manager or designee the lowest floor elevation level, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file; 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-97. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data. 
(b)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the city manager or designee. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided the reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-98. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of floodwaters in to the systems; and 
(2)  Discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Sec. 107-99. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  New construction or substantial improvement of existing critical facilities shall not be allowed in the 100-year or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility shall be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 5-14-2009) 
Secs. 107-100—107-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 111 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 111-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions of land use categories. Land use categories referred to in this chapter are defined herein for the purpose of regulating signs. The use in this chapter of the term "property" relative to a land use category includes both developed and undeveloped properties, while the term "use" means a property that is developed, occupied or otherwise in operation under the land use category. The land use categories are as follow: 
Agricultural means a property used primarily for the cultivation of crops, dairying or the raising of livestock, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. 
Commercial means a property occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the sale of goods; the provision of personal, professional, business, entertainment or other commercial services; the management of a business enterprise; or the provision of temporary housing to the traveling public (such as a motel); or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purposes. 
Industrial means a property occupied by one or more business establishments that are primarily engaged in the fabrication, manufacture or production of durable or nondurable goods, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. 
Institutional means a property occupied by a private, nonprofit religious, recreational, educational or philanthropic organization, club or semipublic institution. 
Multifamily residential means a property occupied primarily by one or more residential buildings containing three or more dwelling units, or a mobile home park, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purposes. 
Single- and two-family residential means a property occupied primarily by one or more single-family dwellings or duplex dwellings, or a vacant property zoned or offered for sale or lease for such purpose. 
(b)  Definitions related to signs. The following words and phrases have specific meanings as used in this chapter: 
Abandoned sign means cessation for a period of six months of the use of a sign by either the owner of the sign or the occupant of the property on which the sign is placed, or through the removal or relocation of the previous occupant of the property, or a sign that has ceased to be used for a period of six months through the removal of its copy or the deterioration of its copy through lack of maintenance, but excluding temporary or shortterm periods of remodeling, refurbishment or maintenance of the sign. 
Animated sign means a sign that uses movement or changes of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. 
Awning means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning sign. See Building sign. 
Banner means a sign made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material, and usually containing a message or logo. 
Building sign means a sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Awning sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon an awning. 
(2)  Canopy sign means a sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any canopy, such that the sign is mounted in such a manner that a continuous face with the canopy is formed. 
(3)  Mansard sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted upon a mansard and not extending above the top of the mansard. 
(4)  Marquee sign means any sign painted on or attached flat to the face of a marquee. 
(5)  Parapet sign means a sign imposed, mounted or painted on a parapet and not extending above the top of the parapet. 
(6)  Projecting sign means a sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 18 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(7)  Roof sign means a sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gambrel, hip or gable roof, and supported by or attached to the roof. 
(8)  Under-canopy sign means a display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over private sidewalks. 
(9)  Wall or fascia sign means a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to the wall, and extending from the surface of the wall no more than 18 inches. 
(10)  Window sign means a sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane or glass door and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 

Canopy means a permanent roof-like structure projecting from a building and open on at least one side for the purpose of shielding a pedestrian walkway from the elements, or a freestanding roof-like structure supported by columns intended to shield a vehicular driveway or service area from the elements. 
Changeable copy sign includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Automatic changeable copy sign means a sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means (e.g., electrical or electronic time and temperature units). The term "copy" means words, numbers and/or pictorial representations. 
(2)  Manual changeable copy sign means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field (e.g., reader boards with changeable letters). Copy shall mean words and numbers. 
Channeled letters (internally illuminated letters) includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Internally channeled letters means letters or other symbols with recessed surfaces designed to accommodate incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
(2)  Reverse channeled letters means letters or other symbols with raised surfaces designed to be lighted from behind by incandescent bulbs or luminous tubing. 
Double-faced sign means a sign structure with two sign faces that are parallel (back-to-back) or that form an angle to one another of no more than 60 degrees, where each sign face is designed to be seen from a different direction. 
Festoons means strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, or other devices or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind. 
Flashing sign means a sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. It does not include electronic signs. 
Freestanding sign means a sign permanently attached to the ground and that is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pole or pylon sign means a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole, pylon, columns, or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face or lowest sign module is not in contact with the ground. 
(2)  Monument sign means a freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face or structure is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Frontage, building, means the width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
Frontage, road, means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Holiday means a day fixed by law or custom commemorating an event or honoring a person. 
Illuminated signs includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Internally illuminated sign means a sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure, usually projected through a transparent or translucent sign face. 
(2)  Externally illuminated sign means any sign that is only illuminated by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
Incidental sign means a small sign, emblem, or decal no larger than two square feet located on a building or structure. Such signs are normally located on doors, windows, and gas pumps, and are generally not readily visible or legible from public rights-of-way. 
Internally illuminated letters. See Channeled letters. 
Mansard means a steeply sloped, roof-like facade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Mansard sign. See Building sign. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. 
Marquee sign. See Building sign. 
Minimum front setback means the minimum distance required by the zoning on a property between an adjoining street and the facade of a principal building on the property. 
Monument sign. See Freestanding sign. 
Multi-faced sign means a single sign structure consisting of two sign faces (see Double-faced sign ) or three or more sign faces that are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. Sign faces on a single sign structure that are separated by more than three feet are treated as separate signs. 
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric or similar material designed to move in the wind; pennants are often suspended from a rope, wire, or string in series. The term "pennant" shall not include a banner as defined in this chapter. 
Planned center means a building or group of buildings occupied by two or more retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries or any other businesses that do not share common space, which is located on a property that is in common ownership or condominium ownership. Buildings that are occupied by two or more businesses that share common space, such as but not limited to a branch bank in a grocery store, a fast-food restaurant in a merchandise store, or booths in a flea market, are not considered planned centers. 
Pole or pylon sign. See Freestanding sign. 
Portable sign means a sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground, such as but not limited to the following: 
(1)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise permanently affixed to it as otherwise required by the building code; 
(2)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels; or 
(3)  A sidewalk, sandwich board or curb-type sign. 
Principal building sign means the main, predominant or largest sign on an individual wall of a building or tenant space. 
Principal freestanding sign means the main, predominant or largest freestanding sign on a property. 
Project entrance sign means a permanent freestanding sign located at a discernible entrance into a multi-family development, or into a development containing multiple lots, such as but not limited to a particular residential or commercial subdivision, business center, office park or industrial park. 
Projecting sign. See Building sign. 
Roof sign. See Building sign. 
Sidewalk or sandwich sign means a moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Sign means any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement, or illumination. 
Sign face means that portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by open space or by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea, and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign module means each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly and physically separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
Sign structure means all elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation or support of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Swinging or projecting sign means a sign projecting perpendicularly from the outside wall of the building upon which it is located. See Projecting sign under Building sign. 
Tenant means a natural person, business or other entity that occupies land or buildings by ownership, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Under-canopy sign. See Building sign. 
Vehicular sign means any sign placed on, mounted on, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flatbed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public right-of-way, except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)  Such conveyances are actively being used to load, transport or unload persons, goods or services in the normal course of business; 
(2)  Such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area, such as but not limited to a loading dock or to the side or rear of a building away from the street; or 
(3)  Such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with, a bona fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway, and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas. 
Wall sign. See Building sign. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 3) 
Sec. 111-2. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Findings. The council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare, as well as an aesthetic nuisance. 
(b)  Intent. By enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the council intends to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan, which is expressly incorporated herein; 
(3)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and others within the city; 
(4)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazard; 
(5)  Promote the aesthetic qualities of the city; 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)  Promote economic development; 
(8)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(c)  Intent of sign regulations. Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this chapter, any sign authorized under this chapter can contain any commercial or noncommercial message. 
(d)  Studies considered. In formulating the provisions of this chapter, the mayor and council considered and reviewed several studies concerning the relationship between highway advertising signs and traffic accidents including: "Safety and Environmental Design Considerations in the Use of Commercial Variable-Message Signage", "Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction", "Electronic Billboards and Highway Safety," and "Chapter 6 Road Signs and Advertising, Report of the Road Safety Committee on the Inquiry Into Driver Distraction." 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 1; Ord. of 5-13-2010(3), § 2) 
Sec. 111-3. - Compliance. 
No sign shall be placed or maintained on any property, building or other structure within the city except in conformity with these sign regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 2) 
Sec. 111-4. - Violations. 
In case any sign, advertising device or other device covered by this chapter is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city manager or designee may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of this Code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court, or institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion or use, or to correct or abate such violation. Without limitation, businesses, organizations, builders, developers, contractors, property owners, and such other parties responsible for the violation may be cited for violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, §§ 2.03, 15.03) 
Sec. 111-5. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
(a)  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this chapter, the following shall establish how sign areas are measured. Unless otherwise specified as the area of a sign face or sign structure, the term "sign area" shall apply to both the sign face and structure. 
(1)  Sign face area. 
a.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

b.  For signs that have no identifiable frame or border, the smallest rectangle that includes all of the sign's words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements intended to convey the sign's message shall establish the area of the sign's face. 

c.  For signs applied to a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign face shall be computed as the largest rectangular area achieved from any one view of the sign. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on the sign. 

d.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports, or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign module. 
e.  Automatic or manual changeable copy signs. For any sign on which any of the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(2)  Sign structure area. 
a.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 

b.  For a kiosk or other cylindrical sign structure, the area of the sign structure shall be the largest measurement achieved from any view of the sign structure. Measurements shall be made as a flat plane rectangle projected on or bisecting the sign structure. 
c.  Project entrance signs. For project entrance signs or other signs that are imposed, mounted or painted on a wall or other decorative structure, the sign structure area shall be computed as that portion of such wall or other decorative structure that is discernibly devoted to the support of the sign or, by its design or architectural treatment, intended to provide a background or frame for the sign. 
(3)  Treatment of open spaces. Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign module, or sign structure. 
(4)  Multi-faced signs. 
a.  Double-faced signs. For double-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the smallest angle formed between the two faces is 60 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For double-faced signs where the interior angle formed by the faces is more than 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be the total area of all sides. 
b.  Signs with three or more faces. For sign structures having only three faces and the interior angle formed between each of the faces is 60 degrees, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs with three or more sides, the area of the sign shall be the largest total of all faces that are joined by an interior angle of more than 60 degrees that can be viewed from any one direction. 
(b)  Measurement of sign height and distance. 
(1)  Sign height. The height of a sign shall be equal to the vertical distance from the average grade at the base of the sign, or from the crown of the roadway of the nearest street if the street is within 100 feet of any portion of the sign (when measured perpendicular to the street), to the highest point of any portion of the sign, whichever results in the greater sign height. Any earthen berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 

(2)  Measurement of distance. Minimum distances required hereunder shall be measured along the shortest straight line from the nearest point on a sign structure to the nearest point on a property line, sign structure, building or structure to which the minimum distance requirement applies. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 7) 
Sec. 111-6. - Signs that are regulated. 
(a)  Applicability. The regulations and requirements of this chapter apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way, a private street or adjacent property, except as otherwise exempt under this section. 
(b)  Exclusions. The following are not considered signs and are excluded from all restrictions and regulations imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  Window displays not visible from a public or private street or from adjoining property are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
(2)  Words and/or graphics on products that are an integral part of the product, the product's original packaging, and product dispensers (such as but not limited to a soft drink machine) are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. Product containers intended for the storage of products are not exempt from these regulations. 
(3)  A building design, color, architectural element or motif that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but which conveys no message is not considered to be a sign and is exempt from these sign regulations. 
(c)  Exemptions. Each of the following types of signs is allowed on any property and is exempt from the restrictions imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  Official signs. Signs placed by or at the direction of a governmental body, governmental agency, board of education or public authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq. As provided by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51, such signs are authorized within all rights-of-way or other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, board of education or public authority and at such other locations as a governmental body, governmental agency or public authority may direct. 
(2)  Incidental signs. Small signs as defined in this chapter of no more than two square feet, provided that the aggregate of all such signs on a property may not exceed 16 square feet unless a larger aggregate area is required by law or government regulation. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 4) 
Sec. 111-7. - Prohibited signs. 
Unless otherwise exempt under subsection 111-6(c), the following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Air- or gas-filled balloons. Air- or gas-filled balloons or other devices which have a capacity for air or gas which exceeds three cubic feet are prohibited, with a maximum of one such device of three cubic feet or less per property. 
(2)  Animated and flashing signs. 
a.  Signs (excluding automatic changeable copy signs) that flash, blink, rotate, revolve, or have moving parts or visible bulbs, and signs containing reflective elements that sparkle in the sunlight or otherwise simulate illumination during daylight hours are not allowed. 
b.  For automatic changeable copy signs, see subsection 111-72(c). 
(3)  Attached and painted signs. Signs that are painted on or attached to trees, curbs, utility poles, or rocks or other natural features are not allowed. 
(4)  Courtesy benches, trash cans, etc. Courtesy benches, trash cans, and similar devices on which a sign is displayed are not allowed. 
(5)  Dilapidated signs. Signs that are dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard, nuisance or to be unsafe or fail to comply with any provision of the building code, are not allowed. 
(6)  Festoons. Strings of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, streamers, pinwheels, balloons or other devices, or long narrow strips of fabric, plastic, or other pliable material designed to move in the wind or by mechanical fan are not allowed. 
(7)  Inflatable signs. A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support is not allowed except air- or gas-filled balloons of three cubic feet or less (see subsection (1) of this section). 
(8)  Misleading statements. It is unlawful for a person to display false or misleading statements upon signs or other public places calculated to mislead the public as to anything sold, services to be performed, or information disseminated. The fact that any such sign or display contains words or language sufficient to mislead a reasonable or prudent person shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section by the persons displaying such sign or permitting such sign to be displayed at their residence, establishment or place of business. 
(9)  Obscene signs. Obscene signs, as defined by the state at O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80(b), are not allowed. 
(10)  Obstructions. No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door, or opening usable for fire prevention or suppression, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall extend above a parapet wall, be affixed to a fire escape, or interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
(11)  Pole or pylon signs. Signs meeting the definition of pole or pylon as defined in this chapter are not allowed as principal freestanding signs under subsections 111-72(b)(1) a. and b. and 111-72(b)(2). 
(12)  Portable signs. A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not permanently attached to the ground, such as but not limited to the following, is not allowed: 
a.  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise permanently affixed to it as otherwise required by the building code; 
b.  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
(13)  Private signs placed on public property. Any sign posted or erected on utility poles, public rights-of-way or any other public property as regulated by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58 et seq. is not allowed, except as required or authorized by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 or any other law. 
(14)  Roof signs. Roof signs, including signs painted or adhered on roofs, are not allowed. This prohibition does not apply to the fascia portion of a mansard roof, or to the face of a parapet wall, provided that the sign must not extend above the top of the mansard roof or parapet wall. 
(15)  Searchlights and similar devices. Searchlights and similar devices are not allowed. 
(16)  Signs advertising illegal activity. Signs that advertise an activity illegal under state or federal law are not allowed. 
(17)  Signs imitating public warning or traffic devices. 
a.  Any sign that displays intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, and any sign that uses the words "stop," "go," "slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or other message or content in a manner that might mislead or confuse a driver, is not allowed. 
b.  Any sign that uses the words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs is not allowed. 
c.  No red, green, and yellow illuminated sign shall be permitted within 300 feet of any traffic light. 
(18)  Sound or smoke emitting signs. A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing, or a sign that emits smoke, vapor or odors, is not allowed. 
(19)  Swinging or projecting signs. Swinging or projecting signs, unless approval is granted by the building official are not allowed. 
(20)  Vehicular signs. Any sign that meets the definition of a vehicular sign as defined in this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 5; Ord. of 5-13-2010(3), § 4) 
Sec. 111-8. - Business license and insurance for sign contractors required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city unless and until such person has obtained a business license issued in the state and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the person has in effect public liability and property damage insurance providing coverage in the sum of $25,000.00 for property damage for any one claim and public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death, to one person. The certificate of insurance shall state that the insurance carrier will notify the city 30 days in advance of any termination or restriction of the coverage. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 13) 
Secs. 111-9—111-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 111-35. - Enforcement. 
The city manager or designee is responsible for general administration of this chapter; the receipt, review and processing of all applications for sign permits; and all sign requests filed with the city. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, §§ 2.01, 15.01; Ord. of 10-11-2012(2), § 1) 
Sec. 111-36. - Removal of illegal or abandoned signs. 
(a)  Removal order. The city manager or designee may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter, or any sign abandoned for six consecutive months or more, by written notice to the permit holder; or if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit was issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. The removal order shall be issued only after the appropriate party fails to comply within seven days after the city gives written notice of noncompliance. 
(1)  Exception; vehicular signs. The city manager or designee may order the removal of any vehicular sign in violation of this chapter after the appropriate party fails to comply within 24 hours after the city gives written notice of noncompliance. 
(b)  Procedure following removal order. An aggrieved party may appeal the removal order within ten days from the date that the notice was mailed. Such appeal shall be made to the council. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal (or 30 days after the date any appeal becomes final), the city manager or designee is authorized to remove the sign or cause the sign to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(c)  Removal without notice. 
(1)  The city manager or designee or any other agent of the city having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
a.  Said sign is illegally placed upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
b.  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(2)  Following such removal, the city may collect the costs as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Costs of removal. 
(1)  Removal of any sign found in violation shall be without liability to the city, its officers, agents, and employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of removal. If there is no permit holder, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of any party that procured the erection of the sign. 
(2)  If payment or arrangement to make payment is not made within 60 days after the receipt of a statement of removal costs, the city manager or designee shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. 
(3)  Costs of removal shall be charged in accordance with a fee schedule established by the city or at the actual cost to the city, whichever is more appropriate to the action taken. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 15; Ord. of 9-9-2010(2), § 1) 
Sec. 111-37. - Sign permits. 
(a)  When required. In addition to a building permit as may be required under the building code, a sign permit shall be obtained from the city manager or designee prior to installation, relocation, expansion, construction or structural alteration of any sign regulated under this chapter except for those signs specifically exempted under subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  A sign permit will not be required under the following conditions: 
a.  For an existing sign, replacing or altering the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements that compose a sign's message, in whole or in part, shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
b.  Painting, repairing, cleaning, or maintaining a sign shall not require a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
(2)  A sign permit will not be required for the following listed signs, provided that such signs meet the requirements of this chapter: 
a.  A sign that is otherwise exempt from regulation under subsection 111-6(c) does not require a sign permit. 
b.  A freestanding sign on a single-family or two-family residential property and no larger than six square feet does not require a sign permit. 
c.  Miscellaneous freestanding signs that are allowed under subsection 111-74(a)(1) and subsection 111-74(a)(3) do not require a sign permit. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, §§ 11.01, 11.02; Ord. of 5-13-2010(3), § 3) 
Sec. 111-38. - Issuance of a sign permit. 
(a)  Review required. For any sign requiring issuance of a sign permit under the provisions of this chapter, review of a completed application shall be required prior to installation, relocation, renovation, expansion, construction or reconstruction of the sign. The sign application, with the nonrefundable application fee established by the city, shall be submitted to the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Sign permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the office of the city manager or designee upon forms furnished by this office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The type of the sign as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  The value of the sign. 
(3)  The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located, and the proposed location of the subject sign on the subject property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the city manager or designee shall be used. 
(4)  The square foot area of the sign face and the sign structure, and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)  The written consent of the owner or his agent granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign. 
(7)  A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all pertinent information required by the city manager or designee, such as wind pressure requirements and display materials. The city manager or designee may require additional information on such print or sketch to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(8)  The name, address, telephone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(9)  A site plan drawn to scale or elevation drawing showing the placement of the sign. 
(10)  Plans for a planned center or mixed use development signage in accordance with the master signage plan requirements of section 111-39. 
(c)  Conformance to building codes. 
(1)  Plans required for issuance of a sign permit shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the building code by a qualified structural engineer, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting, or exceeding all requirements of the building code, if applicable. 
(2)  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
(3)  All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the electrical code. A licensed electrical contractor must obtain an electrical permit and wire the sign to code. 
(4)  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be in conformance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
(d)  Issuance of sign permit. 
(1)  The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 days of the city's actual receipt of a complete application for a sign permit. Revisions or amendments to an application shall extend the review period to 30 days from the date of submission of the revision or amendment. Revisions or amendments received after the issuance of a permit shall constitute a new application. 
a.  The city manager or designee shall reject any application as incomplete that does not include all items required for a sign permit application as set forth under subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  The city manager or designee shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission instead of the original date of submission. 
(2)  Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application, the city manager or designee shall: 
a.  Issue the permit; or 
b.  Inform the applicant of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
(3)  Upon determination that the application fully complies with the provisions of this chapter, the building code, and all other applicable laws, regulations and chapters of the city, the sign permit shall be issued by the city manager or designee. 
(4)  If the city does not process an application for a sign permit within 30 days, then the applicant shall be permitted to erect or construct the sign, sign structure or advertising device for which the permit is sought, unless or until the city manager or designee notifies the applicant of a denial of the application. 
(5)  Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement, the city manager or designee shall revoke the subject sign permit and the subject sign shall be removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to the appeal procedures of this chapter. 
(e)  Permit fee; registration of existing signs. 
(1)  No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the city manager or designee and fees have been paid as provided in this subsection. The fee for such permits shall be based on the square footage of each sign face. If a sign has more than one face, the square footage for purposes of determining the permit fee shall be computed from the sign face with the greatest square footage. The permit fee shall be fixed from time to time by the council. The permit fee as provided in this subsection shall be payable only with the initial application for a sign permit. 
(2)  Each sign, sign structure and advertising device which exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be registered by the owner with the city manager or designee within 90 days of such effective date. Any sign, sign structure or advertising device which exists on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be subject to payment of sign permit fees as set forth in this section. 
(f)  Sign identification labels. 
(1)  With each sign permit, the city manager or designee shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the permittee or his agent to affix such sticker to the sign in the lower right-hand area so it will be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been or is being erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a sign decal to any sign for which it was not issued, or to remove, tamper with, deface or mutilate any sign identification label or sticker issued or placed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 11.03) 
Sec. 111-39. - Master signage plans. 
(a)  Approval required. Signage for a planned center or a mixed use development, whether new or existing, may be established by approval of a master signage plan in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Master signage plan approval. 
(1)  Master signage plans must be approved by the council prior to the issuance of any sign permits for the planned center or mixed use development. 
(2)  An application for master signage plan approval shall be submitted to the city manager or designee. 
(3)  The application shall be scheduled for consideration at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the council following two weeks after the receipt of a complete application by the city manager or designee. 
(c)  Master signage plan standards. Standards as to type, number, size, height, location, orientation or other design provisions established in addition to or in lieu of the restrictions placed on signs by this chapter are to be incorporated into the master signage plan. 
(1)  Master signage plans shall illustrate all proposed signs in sufficient detail so as to provide knowledgeable review and design specificity. Master signage plans shall show, describe or illustrate all signs proposed to be located on a lot and the buildings and structures therein, whether existing or new, and whether permitted by right or as additional signage under these regulations. 
(2)  Signs that are otherwise exempt under this chapter need not be shown on the master signage plan. 
(3)  Upon approval, the master signage plan shall supersede any conflicting restrictions and regulations of this chapter for the property to which it pertains. 
(d)  Recordation of approved master signage plan. 
(1)  Following approval, the master signage plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the clerk to the superior court prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. 
(2)  A copy of the approved master signage plan, as recorded, shall be filed with the city manager or designee prior to issuance of any sign permit. 
(3)  All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser or other occupant, shall comply with the approved master signage plan. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 12) 
Sec. 111-40. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Defined. 
(1)  A nonconforming sign is a sign that does not comply with one or more of the regulations or restrictions imposed by this chapter. 
(2)  A legal nonconforming sign is a sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and which by reason of such adoption or amendment no longer conforms to one or more of the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter as adopted or amended. 
(3)  Any sign that was not lawfully erected in accordance with the sign regulations in effect at the time of the sign's construction, or was subsequently altered in a way inconsistent with the sign regulations in effect at the time of its alteration, is considered an illegal sign and shall not be granted legal nonconformity status. Illegal signs are subject to removal. 
(b)  Removal of nonconforming signs. When a business or service is discontinued, all nonconforming signs relating to the business or service, including all nonconforming principal freestanding signs and sign structures and all nonconforming building signs, shall be removed after six months from the date of discontinuance. 
(c)  Retention of legal nonconformity status. 
(1)  A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation and become an illegal sign if: 
a.  The sign is altered in any way that would make the sign less in compliance with the requirements of this chapter than it was before the alteration; 
b.  The sign is relocated on the property; 
c.  The sign structure is replaced; 
d.  The sign is abandoned for at least six months; 
e.  The deterioration of the sign or damage for any reason to the sign makes it a hazard to public safety; or 
f.  The sign has been damaged to such extent that repairs required to restore the sign would cost more than 50 percent of its current replacement value. 
(2)  On the occurrence of any of the foregoing, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with all requirements of this chapter or the sign shall be removed immediately. 
(d)  Removal of abandoned signs. Signs that have been abandoned, as defined in this chapter, for six consecutive months or more shall be removed thereupon by the owner of the property on which they are located. 
(e)  DOT action requiring removal of nonconforming sign. 
(1)  Where, as a result of design or other requirements imposed by the state department of transportation (DOT), a legal nonconforming sign, as defined herein, must be removed, such sign may be relocated on the same property upon the approval of the city manager or designee. Such approval shall be granted upon the sign owner providing the city manager or designee with written documentation of the actions of the DOT resulting in the required removal of the sign. 
(2)  In the event relocating the nonconforming sign would cause it to be less structurally sound than before its relocation, as determined by the city manager or designee based on evidence provided by the sign owner consisting of certification provided by a qualified professional engineer registered in the state, the sign owner may construct a new sign on the property. A new sign constructed under this provision shall be substantially similar to the original nonconforming sign. 
(3)  Any sign relocated or constructed under this section shall be subject to all other requirements of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(f)  Change to nonconforming sign which would otherwise be permitted under the sign ordinance. 
(1)  In the event the owner of a nonconforming sign wants to change a feature or portion of the sign in a manner that would otherwise be permitted under the sign ordinance, and that change would cause it to be less structurally sound than before, as determined by the city manager or designee based on evidence provided by the sign owner consisting of certification provided by a qualified professional engineer registered in the state, the sign owner will be required to modify the sign structure as needed to ensure it is structurally sound. Any modification required by this subsection shall ensure that the sign remains substantially similar to the original nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Any sign altered under this section shall be subject to all other requirements of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 14; Ord. of 04-12-2018(1), § 1, 4-12-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 04-12-2018(1), § 1, adopted April 12, 2018, set out provisions adding § 111-40(g). To maintain the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as adding § 111-40(f). 
Sec. 111-41. - Appeals. 
If an applicant for a sign permit has been denied a permit by the director, the applicant may appeal this decision by filing a written request with the city manager or designee for the city within ten days of the date of action by the city manager or designee. Such appeal will be heard by the city council at the earliest appropriate meeting, but in no case more than 60 days after the date of the filing of the written request for appeal. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 16) 
Secs. 111-42—111-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 111-71. - General requirements applying to all signs. 
(a)  Conformance to state law. Every sign erected in the city must comply with state law and the terms of this chapter and any other ordinance of the city. Between the state and the city regulations, such sign must comply with the most restrictive requirements with respect to each and every item of regulation. 
(b)  Sign maintenance. 
(1)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city manager or designee may cause any sign to be removed, after due notice, if the sign shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated, or if the ground area around the sign is not well maintained. 
(2)  The city manager or designee will give the owner ten days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the city manager or designee shall have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  Minimum sign setback. 
(1)  No sign or sign structure of any kind is authorized to extend into or above, or be anchored or placed in. any portion of a public right-of-way except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
(2)  No sign or sign structure of any kind shall be located less than ten feet from a side or rear property line. 
(d)  Visibility clearance area. Any portion of a sign located within 25 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or within 20 feet of the intersection of the edge of a driveway and the right-of-way line of a street shall be no more than three feet in height, nor shall such sign otherwise obstruct visibility or pose a threat to traffic safety. 

(e)  Illuminated signs. 
(1)  Types of illumination. 
a.  Externally illuminated sign. An externally illuminated sign, when permitted, shall have concealed wiring and controls, and shall have shielded and screened external light sources. 
b.  Internally illuminated sign. Internally illuminated signs, where permitted, must completely shield the source of light from direct view. 
(2)  Traffic control. No sign illumination device shall resemble an official traffic control or warning sign, nor shall it hide from view or distract from any traffic or street sign or signal. 
(3)  Hazards. Illumination devices shall be placed, filtered, and shielded so direct rays will not be cast into the eyes of drivers or pedestrians. 
(4)  Light pollution. Sign illumination shall not cast light directly upon adjacent properties or roadways. No illuminated signs are allowed within 100 feet of any residential zoning district or property occupied by a dwelling. 
(5)  Exposed wires. No sign may have exposed electrical wires. 
(6)  Hours of illumination. No sign shall be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for those hours during which the premises on which the sign is located is open for business or events are taking place on the premises. 
(7)  UL listing. All components of an illuminated sign shall be Underwriters Laboratories (UL) listed, or the equivalent thereof, with an identification label that shows the manufacturer of the sign. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 6) 
Sec. 111-72. - Signs allowed, by land use category. 
(a)  Residential land uses. The following types of signs are allowed on residential properties: 
(1)  Project entrance signs in accordance with section 111-74. Such signs may be externally illuminated only (see section 111-71(e)). 
(2)  Other freestanding signage. 
a.  Only one per frontage per property shall be located within the minimum front yard setback as determined by the zoning district applied to the property. 
b.  No such sign shall be more than six square feet in area and three feet in height when located on a lot within a developed residential subdivision. 
c.  One sign no more than 32 square feet and six feet in height may be located on any other residential property. All other signs shall not exceed six square feet and three feet in height. 
d.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(3)  Wall signs. 
a.  No wall signs are allowed on a single-family or two-family residence or accessory structure. 
b.  Wall signs on a multifamily residential building: one wall sign per wall no more than 16 square feet in area. 
(b)  Nonresidential and mixed land uses. The following types of signs are allowed on nonresidential, institutional or mixed use properties in the city: 
(1)  Principal signage: 
a.  Properties occupied by a single business or multiple businesses sharing common space (i.e., not a planned center): one principal freestanding sign on each street frontage with a curb cut and one principal building sign per building elevation visible from a public or private street. 
b.  Planned centers: one principal freestanding sign on each street frontage from which access is achieved and one principal building sign for each business with an exterior wall visible to a public or private street frontage. 
c.  Undeveloped properties: one principal freestanding sign on each street frontage. 
(2)  Permanent project entrance signs for a residential subdivision or mixed use development, with a maximum area of 32 square feet and maximum height of eight feet. Such signs may not be internally illuminated. 
(c)  Automatic changeable copy signs. Automatic changeable copy signs are allowed only on commercial, office and institutional properties, and only allowed as part of a principal freestanding sign, except that the following are prohibited: 
(1)  Electronic signs that display a message for less than one-half second are not allowed. 
(2)  Electronic signs that repeat messages at intervals of less than two seconds are not allowed. 
(3)  Electronic signs that display segmented messages which last longer than ten seconds are not allowed. 
(4)  Electronic signs with traveling messages that travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns per second or faster than 32 light columns per second are not allowed. 
(d)  Rear entrance signs. 
(1)  One rear entrance sign is required for each tenant within a planned center. 
(2)  Rear entrance signs shall be located on the tenant's rear door. 
(3)  The area of rear entrance signs shall not exceed three square feet; however, the sign may not be less than 18 inches wide and 12 inches high and shall be clearly legible for public safety personnel. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 8) 
Sec. 111-73. - Size, height and setback requirements. 
(a)  Building signs, nonresidential uses. Building signs are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The maximum sign area allowed on each building elevation visible from a public or private street is as follows: 
a.  For single-occupant buildings (or multiple tenants sharing common space), the maximum allowed area for a principal building sign shall be in accordance with the table following subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  For planned centers, the maximum allowed area for a principal building sign for each business or tenant on each exterior wall enclosing the tenant's space shall be in accordance with the table following subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  A building sign may not project higher than the wall or surface to which it is attached. 
(3)  A building sign may not project more than 18 inches from the wall surface unless approved as a swinging or projecting sign under subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Swinging and projecting signs. 
a.  Projecting signs, if allowed by the city manager or designee, shall not project more than 42 inches beyond the face of the building, nor exceed 16 square feet in area. 
b.  Projections shall be at a 90-degree angle to the building face. 
c.  All sides of a projecting sign shall be finished. 
(5)  Miscellaneous building signs as allowed under section 111-74(b). 
(6)  Building signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(7)  Ground clearance under signs. 
a.  Projecting signs shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance from ground level to the bottom of the sign. 
b.  Under-canopy signs of greater than four square feet shall be rigidly mounted, and there shall be eight feet of clearance below the base of any rigidly mounted under-canopy sign. There shall be a minimum clearance of seven feet below the base of any nonrigidly mounted under-canopy sign. 
c.  Awning, mansard and marquee signs shall be no less than eight feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
(b)  Principal freestanding signs, nonresidential uses. Principal freestanding for commercial, institutional or industrial uses are subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Maximum height shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  Minimum setback is 13 feet from the curb or two feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. See section 111-71(d) regarding the visibility clearance area. No more than one principal freestanding sign may be located within the minimum front yard as specified by the zoning district applied to the property. 
(3)  Maximum sign area for shall be in accordance with the table following subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  The principal freestanding sign authorized by such street frontage shall be located in accordance with section 111-74. 
(5)  Principal freestanding signs shall be separated from other principal freestanding signs as follows: 
a.  Signs 48 square feet in area or less. Each principal freestanding sign having an area of 48 square feet or less shall be located at least 50 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. The city manager or designee may reduce this distance if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
b.  Signs between 48 and 99 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area of between 48 and 99 square feet shall be located at least 100 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. The city manager or designee may reduce this distance if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
c.  Signs greater than 99 square feet in area. Each principal freestanding sign having an area greater than 99 square feet shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any other principal freestanding sign having an area greater than 99 square feet, and at least 100 feet from any other principal freestanding sign on the same side of the street. Distance measurements are to be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(6)  Principal freestanding signs located within 100 feet of a public right-of-way shall display the street address of the property. Within a planned center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. This section does not apply to any principal freestanding sign where the sign is located on property that has more than one street frontage and the property address is assigned from a street other than the street frontage whereupon such sign is erected. Street numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background, visible from both directions of travel along the street, no less than six inches or more than nine inches in height. 
(7)  Miscellaneous freestanding signs as allowed under section 111-74. 
(8)  Principal freestanding signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
Maximum Sign Face Area 

 
(c)  Signs in planned centers. Signs in planned (i.e., multitenant) centers must adhere to the minimum requirements of this article or uniform guidelines established by master signage plans. Master signage plans are to be filed with the city manager or designee and approved by the council prior to issuance of a sign permit. 
(d)  Canopy signs. Canopy signs are restricted to one canopy sign, not to exceed 12 square feet per side facing public or private road. 
(e)  Gas station signs. In addition to the gasoline service building wall sign, one additional wall sign, not to exceed 20 square feet shall be permitted on a detached car wash building that is an accessory use to the gasoline service station building. The detached car wash building wall sign shall be consistent with the color and style of other signage on the site. 
(f)  Window signs. Window signs placed on, inside or outside of the window and visible from a public thoroughfare may not obstruct more than 20 percent of the window area. See section 111-71(e) for prohibitions and restrictions on illumination. 
(g)  Double frontage and corner lots. Where any lot, parcel, or tract of land exists and has frontage on two or more streets, only one principal freestanding sign per road frontage with a curb cut shall be allowed. Each such sign shall conform to the requirements of section 111-73(b) individually. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 9) 
Sec. 111-74. - Other signs allowed. 
(a)  Miscellaneous freestanding signs. Freestanding signs in addition to those allowed under section 111-72 are allowed as accessory uses on a property occupied by any multifamily, commercial, institutional, or industrial use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Within the area between a street and the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, additional signs may be located within three feet of driveways that provide access into or from the property. There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed three square feet in sign area, nor be more than three feet in height. Signs shall be located at least 12 feet from the curb or two feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Within the area between a street and the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, the following additional miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed: 
a.  Two banners, as defined by this chapter, may be located for each 250 feet of road frontage or portion thereof. Banners shall not exceed 24 square feet in sign area or be more than six feet in height and shall be located at least 20 feet from any other sign. Approved banner permits shall remain in effect for a period of not more than 30 days including installation and removal. 
1.  No more than six banner permits shall be permitted per road frontage as defined in subsection 111-74(a)(2)a of this Code within a 12-month calendar period for each tenant in a planned center as defined by this chapter, and a period of at least 30 days shall be required between each permit period. 
b.  One unlighted sign of no more than 32 square feet in face area and eight feet in height and constructed of nonmasonry materials. 
(3)  Miscellaneous freestanding signs located farther from the street than the minimum required front yard setback are allowed as follows: 
a.  Signs shall neither exceed 16 square feet in area nor more than six feet in height, provided that each such sign must be located at least 100 feet from any street right-of-way line. 
b.  Other miscellaneous freestanding signs are allowed beyond the minimum front yard setback on a property developed for multifamily, commercial, institutional, or industrial use, provided that such signs shall have no more than three square feet in sign face area, nor be more than three feet in height (except signs that are required by law to be higher than three feet high, such as those marking a handicapped parking space). 
(b)  Miscellaneous building signs. Miscellaneous building signs are allowed in addition to the principal building signs allowed under section 111-73. Miscellaneous building signs shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  For single-occupant buildings, the maximum allowed area for a miscellaneous building sign shall be 0.25 square feet of sign face area per linear foot of the length of the wall on which the sign is affixed, or the applicable total aggregate in the table following subsection 111-73(b), whichever is smaller. 
(2)  For planned centers, the maximum allowed area for a miscellaneous building sign for each business or tenant shall be 0.25 square feet of sign face area per linear foot of the tenant frontage (as defined in this chapter), or the applicable total aggregate in the table following subsection 111-73(b), whichever is smaller. 
(3)  The number of such signs shall be limited by the aggregate total sign area allowed on a wall under the table following subsection 111-73(b) less the area of the principal building sign on the wall. 
(c)  Project entrance signs. 
(1)  Project entrance signs are signs located at an entrance into a residential subdivision, into a multifamily development, or into a mixed use development. Each project entrance shall have no more than one such sign per entrance if double-faced or two signs if attached to symmetrical entrance structures. 
a.  Minimum setback is 12 feet from the curb or two feet behind the right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
b.  The maximum face area is 32 square feet. 
(2)  One banner of not more than 16 square feet of sign area and five feet in height may be located at the entrance into a residential subdivision, into a multifamily development, or into a mixed use development. Permit applications for banners shall state the time period the sign will be utilized. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2008, § 10; Ord. of 5-13-2010(3), § 1; Ord. of 10-11-2012(2), § 2) 
Chapter 113 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part 1 of an ordinance adopted May 13, 2010(4), amended ch. 113 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 113, §§ 113-1—113-9, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. of 1-8-2004, § II—X. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 113-1. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Gwinnett or Walton Soil and Water Conservation District, as appropriate. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 113-3(c) of this chapter. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 113-2(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The City of Loganville, Georgia. Also, the "city." 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual), published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Gwinnett or Walton Soil and Water Conservation District, as appropriate. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 113-2. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite-quarrying and land-clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 113-3(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 113-3. - Minimum requirements; best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the city or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The city may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Minimum requirements governing land-disturbing activities. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans shall contain, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and utilize best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 50-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 50 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Injury to other property. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 113-4. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the planning and development department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the planning and development department must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary and in the number required by the department. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 113-3(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), in the amount of $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. One-half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the EPD and one-half to the city; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 113-3(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof, of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. Prior to the calling of any bond forfeiture, the city shall afford the permit holder the opportunity to appeal as provided for in chapter 103 for construction permits. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Design criteria . Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 113-3(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. The site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 113-3(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 113-3(b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by the city shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
Sec. 113-5. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
Sec. 113-6. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the city shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the city shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the city shall issue an immediate stop work order; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 113-4(b)(6). The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the city issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
State Law reference— Stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12; civil penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15. 
Sec. 113-7. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Sec. 113-8. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 60 days after receipt by the planning and development department of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Gwinnett of Walton County, as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
Sec. 113-9. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 5-13-2010(4), pt. 1) 
Chapter 115 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Environment and natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 115-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for longterm inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Linear development project means a land development project that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  The construction of electric and telecommunication utility lines, natural gas and petroleum pipelines, water and sewer lines, and related facilities including but not limited to electric substations and pumping stations; 
(2)  Construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related facilities of a railroad company; and 
(3)  Road and highway projects. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city manager or designee to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site, as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale or other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-102) 
Sec. 115-2. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation to be served. If the city manager or designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(c)  Contents of notice. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation, except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient. 
(d)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city manager or designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days, except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city manager or designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city manager or designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The city manager or designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city manager or designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city manager or designee may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city manager or designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city manager or designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city manager or designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00, depending on the severity of the violation), for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city manager or designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in court to answer charges for such violation. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), §§ 22-107—22-107.2) 
Sec. 115-3. - Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. 
(b)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution. Therefore, the city has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-100) 
Sec. 115-4. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in. stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of non structural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm follow up. 
(b)  The list in subsection (a) of this section is a general set of objectives to reduce the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality from land development activities. The local stormwater authority may wish to set more specific objectives based upon a watershed management plan, impervious surface targets, or the findings of a watershed assessment or study, or in order to address a local water quality problem or TMDL. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-101.1) 
Sec. 115-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Linear development projects performed by utilities that do not create significant impervious cover; 
(4)  Linear development projects performed by the state DOT or railroads; 
(5)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(6)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-101.2) 
Sec. 115-6. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-101.4) 
Sec. 115-7. - Enforcement officer. 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-101.3) 
Sec. 115-8. - Stormwater design manual. 
The city manager or designee will utilize the policy, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, or equivalent local stormwater management design manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-101.6) 
Secs. 115-9—115-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 115-35. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this chapter, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city manager or designee a permit application on a form provided by the city manager or designee for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 115-36; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 115-37; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 115-38, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 115-39. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.1) 
Sec. 115-36. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Pre-submission consultation. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the landowner or developer meet with the city manager or designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  Contents of plan. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(4)  Other plans. Local watershed plans, the city greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.2) 
Sec. 115-37. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  Details of compliance with chapter. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in article III. 
(b)  Criteria to be met; verification required. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  Supporting documents and information to be included. The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This information includes: 
(1)  Location. Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Map. Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of exiting site conditions, with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each, subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in article IV of this chapter, location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumption, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in article IV of this chapter must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of non structural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in article IV of this chapter; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with Ord. of 1-2004 or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on n the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from the public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 115-38, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 115-38. 
(12)  Other required permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city manager or designee that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.3) 
Sec. 115-38. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Binding agreement required. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  Approval by city. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  Designation of responsible person. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate, for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  Schedule of inspections and maintenance. As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  Enforcement. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or designee may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in article V of this chapter. 
(f)  Alternative to agreement. The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.4) 
Sec. 115-39. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 115-35. Two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement is disapproved, the city manager or designee shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) of this section and this subsection (d) shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city manager or designee that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this chapter, the local permitting authority may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this chapter and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city manager or designee shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city manager or designee; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 115-103. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.6) 
Sec. 115-40. - Application review fees. 
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.7) 
Sec. 115-41. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city manager or designee which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-103.8) 
Secs. 115-42—115-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 115-71. - Scope. 
The performance criteria in this article shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104) 
Sec. 115-72. - Water quality. 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.1) 
Sec. 115-73. - Steam channel protection. 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.2) 
Sec. 115-74. - Overbank flooding protection. 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 115-73 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.3) 
Sec. 115-75. - Extreme flooding protection. 
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.4) 
Sec. 115-76. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  Criteria to be applied. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from (local permitting authority) before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the (local stormwater permitting authority) may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Guidance on design feasibility. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.5) 
Sec. 115-77. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 115-72. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures to be used applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.6) 
Sec. 115-78. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of the public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.7) 
Sec. 115-79. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.) and rules for dam safety as applicable. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-104.8) 
Secs. 115-80—115-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 115-102. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-105.1) 
Sec. 115-103. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city manager or designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-105.2) 
Secs. 115-104—115-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 115-135. - Longterm maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Ongoing inspections required. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this chapter. 
(b)  Responsibility; failure; notice. A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city manager or designee shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city manager or designee, may correct the violation as provided in section 115-138. 
(c)  Types and extent of inspections. Inspection programs by the city manager or designee may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-106.1) 
Sec. 115-136. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city manager or designee to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-106.2) 
Sec. 115-137. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-106.3) 
Sec. 115-138. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement after 30 days' written notice, except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient, the city manager or designee may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city manager or designee may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work, which shall be a lien on the property and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2003(1), § 22-106.4) 
Chapter 117 - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Environment and natural resource protection, O.C.G.A. § 12-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 117-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 117-13(1)), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 117-13(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any perennial or intermittent stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the intermittent or perennial base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-128) 
Sec. 117-2. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-131) 
Sec. 117-3. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the city may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone regulations are addressed in the approval process. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-132) 
Sec. 117-4. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the review and permitting authority determines that an applicant or other, responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. 
(1)  Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(2)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(c)  Penalties. 
(1)  Cure period. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, anyone or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take anyone or more of the following actions or impose anyone or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, then the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in (appropriate municipal, magistrate or recorders) court to answer charges for such violation. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), §§ 22-135—22-135.2) 
Sec. 117-5. - Findings. 
The city council finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-127.1) 
Sec. 117-6. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of this city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-127.2) 
Sec. 117-7. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 117-1. These requirements are in addition to and do not replace or supersede any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-129) 
Sec. 117-8. - Grandfather provisions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(2)  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-129.1) 
Sec. 117-9. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this chapter. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Public access facilities that must be on the water, including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
d.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect or approved under the terms of this chapter, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(4)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(c)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-129.2) 
Sec. 117-10. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of review and permitting authority may appeal an enforcement action in writing within ten days after receipt of such action to the city council. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the appeals board of the city, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Walton County. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-136) 
Sec. 117-11. - Responsibility. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-133) 
Sec. 117-12. - Inspection. 
(a)  Authority. The city manager or designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city manager or designee in making such inspections. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  Right of entry. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-134) 
Sec. 117-13. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this chapter shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. Where the average slope of the land in the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer is between ten percent (or a one-foot rise in ten linear feet) and 25 percent (a one-foot rise in four linear feet), an additional ten feet shall be added to the horizontal distance of the buffer. Where the average slope of the land in the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer is greater than 25 percent, an additional 20 feet shall be added to the horizontal distance of the buffer. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Where additional width has been added due to slope, the setback shall start at the end of the extended buffer. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. of 3-21-2004(4), § 22-130.1) 
Chapter 119 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 18, 2014(2), amended ch. 119 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 119, §§ 119-1—119-485, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. of July 21, 2005, §§ 2.1—17.2; Ord. of July 13, 2006(1), §§ 1—3; Ord. of July 10, 2008, §§ 1—3; Ord. of Nov. 13, 2008; Ord. of Jan. 8, 2009, § 8.13; and Ord. of Sept. 9, 2010(3), pt. 1. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 11-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 119-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
Accessory use means a use or structure on the same lot, and of a nature customarily and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Examples of accessory uses include, freestanding garages, storage buildings, tennis courts, swimming pools. 
Adult entertainment means any activity incorporated in the definition of adult entertainment facility as defined in chapter 6, article III; provided, however, the term "adult entertainment" is not intended to apply to theatrical performances, motion picture theaters, or museums where adult entertainment is not the mainstream activity of such establishments. 
Adult entertainment facility means any commercial establishment operating as an adult entertainment facility pursuant to chapter 6, article III. 
Alley means a minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street or a public or private thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration, building or structural, means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as any type of support in a structural member), except such changes as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one zoning district classification to another; or change of a building from one location to another. 
Animal hospital means a facility for the treatment or temporary boarding of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. This facility may not include the boarding of animals in outside runs or kennels. 
Animal quarters means any structure which surrounds or is used to shelter, care for, house, feed, exercise, train, exhibit, display or show any animals, or other fenced pastureland for grazing. 
Apartment means a room or suite of rooms used as a dwelling for one family, which does its cooking therein. 
Apartment building means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
Automotive sales (new) means an automobile the equitable or legal title to which has never been transferred by a manufacturer, distributor or dealer to an ultimate purchaser. 
Automotive sales (used) means any vehicle which has been driven more than the limited use necessary in moving or road testing a new vehicle prior to delivery to a consumer. No automotive sales lots are allowed in the City of Loganville that exclusively sell used vehicles as defined herein. Instead, at least 25 percent of the inventory of each automotive sales lot that sells used vehicles must be comprised of new vehicles offered for sale. 
Automobile service station means a building or premises where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold, provided there is no storage of automobiles, and only minor services are rendered. An automobile service station is neither a repair garage nor a body shop. 
Basement means that portion of any building for which the finished surface of its floor meets any of the following conditions: 
(1)  More than six feet below grade; 
(2)  More than six feet below the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; or 
(3)  More than 12 feet below the finished ground level at any point. 
Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for two or more but not more than ten persons; provided that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boardinghouse by reason of a contribution to expenses or expense-sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related by blood or marriage. 
Buffer strip means a portion of a lot or a land area used to visually separate one use from another through the use of vegetation, screening and distance to shield or obstruct noise, illumination, visual, or other incompatibilities or nuisances. A buffer is measured from the common property line of the different uses. 
Building means any structure attached to the ground having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
Building, height of , means the vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Grade is defined as the average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. In a residential district, the dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of the building and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into the required yard. 
Centerline of street means the line surveyed and monumented by the city or the state highway department or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Certificate of occupancy means compliance approval or a certificate of occupancy issued by the city manager or designee indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with this chapter, or that there has been a legal variance therefrom as provided by this chapter. 
City council, council. The term city council or council means the City Council of the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
Clinic means an establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a physician or dentist or group of physicians or dentists practicing medicine. 
Club means a building or facility owned or operated by and for special educational and recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
Community shelter means a nonprofit, institutional use comprised of a building, institutional in nature, which provides overnight shelter, sleeping accommodations and services, and not otherwise mandated by the state government, for related or nonrelated individuals for a period of time not to exceed 15 hours every 24 hours. 
Comprehensive plan means a comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data, and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto recommended by the city planning commission, indicating the general location for major streets, parks, or other similar information. The comprehensive plan shall be based upon and include appropriate studies of the location and extent of present and anticipated population, social and economic resources and problems, and other useful data. 
Conditional use means a use that is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within in a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this chapter or required by the city council. 
Conditional zoning means the attachment of special conditions to a rezoning which are not spelled out in the text of this chapter. Conditions include restrictions as to use, size, design and development timing and can be stipulated by the city council as a means to mitigate potential adverse impacts that could be expected to occur without imposing such conditions. 
Condominium means a multiple dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned or financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entranceways and underlying lands are owned jointly. 
Courtyard means open spaces that may or may not have direct street access, around which is arranged a single building or group of related buildings. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having one end open to traffic and being shown as permanently terminated within the plat by a vehicular turnaround. 
Curb cut means any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure within which is provided care and supervision on a regular basis for persons away from their place of residence. Services are provided for compensation for less than 24 hours per day. Day care includes group day care homes, family day care homes, adult day care, preschools, play schools, nursery schools, private kindergartens and early learning centers. 
Density means the overall intensity of land use for the total project. A buildable lot area shall not include any parts of rivers, streams, floodplains or wetland areas. The term "density" also means: 
(1)  The number of dwelling units per area of land used for residential purposes. 
(2)  The size of commercial or industrial building that conforms to a site plan that includes size of lot, buffer zones, landscaping, parking, etc., according to zoning regulations. 
District means a section of the city as shown on the official zoning map within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the customer on the outside of the principal building. 
Drive-in restaurant means any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment, or beverage in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink the food or beverage on the premises. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings; roominghouses and boardinghouses; fraternities; sororities; and manufactured dwellings, but not including hotels or motels. 
Dwelling, multifamily , means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. The structure shall consist of a kitchen, eating area, sleeping quarters/bedrooms, a toilet with a washbasin, and a shower and/or tub with a minimum of 60 square feet per bedroom per occupant, provided that the lease or rental of this building by the owner to any individual shall not be sub-leased. Occupancy of such building/dwelling is not to include more than five adult persons in total for occupancy of this building/dwelling. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed or arranged to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged and used for living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
Dwelling unit, efficiency , means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
Family, immediate, means and includes health care providers, spouse, child, child's spouse, grandchild, grandchild's spouse, grandparents, parent, parent-in-law, or sibling. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Fee simple means the owner is entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of disposition during his life and which descends to his heirs and legal representatives upon his death intestate. 
Fence means an enclosure, barrier, or boundary made of boards, stakes, wire, rails or iron to enclose a designated area. 
Flat means a residential unit consisting of a single story and located in a multifamily or mixed-use building. 
Floodplain means that area within the intermediate regional flood contour elevations subject to periodic flooding once in 100 years as designated by the city engineer based upon the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers floodplain reports, U.S. Department of Agriculture soils reports, and other federal, state, county or local hydraulic studies. 
Floor area, gross, means the total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, which would include unfinished basement areas, unfinished bonus rooms, porches, carports and garages. 
Floor area, heated, means the gross heated finished horizontal area of the several floors of a dwelling unit, normally excluding a basement, attic, carport and/or garage. 
Frontage, lot, means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Frontage, street, means all of the property on one side of a street located between the street intersections. 
Garage, public, means an accessory building or portion of a principal building used primarily for vehicle storage. 
Garage, repair, means a garage intended to be used to make commercial automobile or other motor vehicle repairs. 
Hard-surfaced area or all-weather surface means an area which has been packed and covered with gravel and confined by landscaping timbers, railroad cross-ties, brick or rock wall. 
Health department means the Gwinnett County or Walton County Health Department, as appropriate, as the enforcing agent of the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
Home occupations means any occupation or activity carried on by a member of the family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is no group instruction, assembly or activity and no sign is used that will indicate that the building is being utilized in any part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; there is no commodity sold upon the premises; no person is employed other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no heavy mechanical or electronic equipment other than that normally found in a home is used for commercial purposes. 
Hospital means a public or private institution receiving inpatients or outpatients, and licensed under state law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of mental patients, alcoholics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Hotel means a building in which lodging and boarding are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby and office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contrast to a boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
Industrialized building means a factory-manufactured, transportable building consisting of units designed to be assembled (attached) at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for commercial or industrial purposes. An industrialized structure must be manufactured by a manufacturer approved by the department of community affairs and meet the same requirements as a site-built structure located within the city. 
Inoperable vehicle means any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven and not properly licensed or inspected for safety in accordance with state law. 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or nonoperable automobile, truck, or other vehicle that does not bear a current license plate and insurance. 
Junkyard/salvage yard means any use on public or private property involving the parking, storage or disassembly for junk vehicles and machinery; the storage, sale or resale of used auto parts, tires, scrap iron, metal; used plumbing fixtures, old stoves, refrigerators and other old household appliances; used brick, wood, or other building/structural materials; or used paper, rags or other scrap materials. These uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or parts of these operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with or accessory to other uses of the premises. 
Kennel means an establishment where dogs are bred, trained or boarded. 
Kindergarten means a state-approved institution for the education of preschool-aged children. 
Landfill, inert waste, means a landfill accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trash, stumps, limbs and leaves. This definition excludes other types of industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above. 
Landscape strip means land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Landscaping means that portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. Landscaped open space may include, but need not be limited to, grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls and fences, sidewalks/walkways, ornamental objects such as fountains, statutes and other similar natural and manmade objects, wood areas, and watercourses, any or all of which are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within the development. 
Livestock means and includes cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine and other hoofed animals; poultry, ducks, geese and other live fowl; and rabbits, mink, foxes and other fur or hide-bearing animals customarily bred or raised in captivity for the harvesting of their skins; whether owned or kept for pleasure, utility or sale. 
Loading space means off-street vehicle parking space reserved for bulk pickups and deliveries. 
Loft means a residential unit located in a new mixed-use building or in a nonresidential building that has been converted to mixed or residential use. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat of record or survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development which is capable of being occupied by a use as herein defined. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "lot" does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage, means any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets. 
Lot line means a boundary of a lot. The term "lot line" is synonymous with the term "property line." 
Lot line, front, means the front property line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Gwinnett or Walton Counties or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the same office as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line. 
Manufactured home means a dwelling unit meeting National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and approved by the Georgia Commission of Insurance/Safety Fire Marshal. A manufactured home is transportable in one or more sections, is a minimum of ten feet in width; constructed on a permanent chassis; designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without permanent foundation and to be attached to required utility systems; and containing electrical, heating, air conditioning and plumbing systems. The term "manufactured home" includes the term "mobile home." 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes or spaces or lots set aside and offered for rent to use as manufactured homes for living purposes. A manufactured home park does not include manufactured home sales lot on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for inspection or sale. 
Map, zoning map or Loganville Zoning Map means the official zoning map of the City of Loganville, Georgia. 
Mini-warehouse/storage lots means and includes: 
(1)  A building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amount of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sales on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
(2)  Spaces that provide storage for recreation vehicles, to include motor homes, campers, travel trailers, pop-ups, etc. 
(3)  Spaces for all types of watercraft to include boats, jet skis, pontoons, etc. 
Storage lots are to be completely separated from a mini-warehouse by an eight-foot-high fence. 
Mobile home means a manufactured home. Camping-style trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or other forms of recreational vehicles are not mobile homes. 
Modular home. See Manufactured home. 
Motel means a building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for rental primarily to automobile transients. 
Nonconforming use means any building or use of land or building lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, which does not conform with the provisions of the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
Nursery or kindergarten school means any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of preschool age children and including all normal accessory and play areas. 
Nursing home means a home for the aged, infirmed, or incapacitated persons in which three or more persons not of an immediate family are kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics, or other similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
Office park means a development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
Official zoning map means a map formally delineating the boundaries of zoning districts that, along with the zoning text, constitutes the zoning regulations. 
Open-air market means display and retail sales of new goods and merchandise in the unenclosed pedestrian ways or public and open spaces of a retail or mixed-use development. Freestanding awnings or other sun shields shall not exceed 100 square feet of surface area. 
Parking space means an area having suitable access and size to be used exclusively as a temporary storage space for a private motor vehicle. 
Parking space, off-street, means an off-street parking space consisting of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Design standards for off-street parking spaces are contained in this chapter. 
Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
Principal use means the primary or predominant purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants means private deed restrictions or covenants imposed on land by private landowners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by the city or other public agency. 
Public street means a right-of-way dedicated to the city or owned by the city for public street purposes. 
Recovered materials processing facility, accessory, means any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting household and commercial materials to be recycled, including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials, whenever such use is customarily incidental to a shopping center, church, school, multifamily residential development, waste disposal facility or similar use. 
Recovered materials processing facility, principal, means any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, processing and shipping materials to be recycled, including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum whenever such use is principal to the site. 
Religious facility means a facility operated for worship or promotion of religious activities, including, but not limited to, churches, mosques, synagogues and religious "Sunday-type schools." 
Residential shelter means a housing facility maintained to provide a temporary, short-term residence for homeless individuals or families offering limited supplemental services for the homeless population yearround, provided no facility is used for more than 30 days at a time by any individual or family. 
Rezoning means an amendment to or a change in the zoning regulations. Rezoning can take three forms: 
(1)  A comprehensive revision to the zoning text and official zoning map; 
(2)  A text change in the zoning district requirements; and 
(3)  A change made to the official zoning map. 
Right-of-way means access over or across a particularly described property for a specific purpose. 
Road frontage means the distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or public road right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the city for vehicular traffic or over which the city may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered federal and state highways. 
Roominghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging only is provided for not more than ten persons. 
Scrap tire processing plant means a facility that grinds, shreds, chops, or otherwise processes scrap tires for secondary use. 
Screening means a method of shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or the like. 
Service station means any building, structure or land used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil accessories, and motor vehicle servicing, except that major repairs, body repairs, and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered motor vehicle servicing. 
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; that is planned, developed, and analyzed as a unit, related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves, and provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. Shopping centers are classified by type, and sizes of stores. Shopping centers are classified by type, each distinctive in its own function: 
(1)  Neighborhood shopping centers, which provide for the sale of convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry, dry cleaning, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs of the immediate neighborhood and are usually built around a supermarket which is the principal tenant. 
(2)  Community shopping centers which, in addition to the convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry, dry cleaning, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day-to-day living needs of the immediate neighborhood, are usually built around a junior department store which is the principal tenant. 
(3)  Regional shopping centers, which provide for general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home furnishings in full depth and variety. They are built with one or more full-line department stores as the focal point. 
Sign, business, means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise which directs attention to goods, commodities, products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
Spa means an establishment that offers massage, as defined herein, along with at least four other classifications of services for the human body, each of which requires a state license. Examples of other classifications of services that are included in the definition of a spa include, but are not limited to, manicure/pedicure, waxing, wrapping and facials. 
Stable, private means a building or facility used as a stable with a capacity of not more than two horses, mules or other draught animals. Land area must consist of five acres within the city limits. The stable must be located 100 feet from any property line. 
Story means that portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a room suite or story with more than one-half of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of regulations. The first floor of a two- or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. Various classifications of streets shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Arterial means a street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow; is of considerable continuity; and is used as a traffic artery for intercommunication between large areas. 
(2)  Major collector means a street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of higher classification. 
(3)  Minor collectors means principal entrance streets to subdivisions and the main streets for circulation within subdivisions, and which serve a network of four or more local streets. Minor collector streets are designated so that traffic circulation in a subdivision would cause such a street to be used as a link between local streets and major collector or arterial streets. 
(4)  Local means a street used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
(5)  Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(6)  Marginal access means a street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground. 
Subdivider means the person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Subdivision means a tract of land that has been divided into two or more lots, all fronting on a public street, and offered for sale as individual lots. 
Surface-treated area means an area that has been covered with asphalt or concrete. 
Tourist home means a dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered to transient visitors for compensation. 
Townhouse means a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple or condominium or cooperative ownership, as defined by laws of the state. 
Trailer or motor home means a motorized vehicle, designed and/or maintained for the use for travel or recreation purposes exclusively off the premises, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks. 
Trailer, travel, means a nonmotorized vehicle pulled by an automobile or truck designed and/or maintained for use off the premises for travel or recreation purposes exclusively. 
Use means the purpose or purposes for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which said land or building is occupied, maintained or leased. 
Used or occupied as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the terms "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of a structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by a variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
Vehicle, abandoned, means a vehicle that does not bear a current license plate, unless said vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed building. 
Veterinary clinic means a facility for the treatment of domestic animals, operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use and does not take place in outside runs or kennels. 
Waste incineration facility means any facility that reduces waste volume by burning at a high temperature for a specified period of time. This term excludes air curtain destructors used for the on-site burning of yard trimmings and wood wastes at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2); Ord. of 7-9-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 119-2. - Violations. 
In case any building or structure is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or converted, or any building, structure or land is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the city manager or designee will, after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation for violation of the City Code requiring the presence of the violator in the municipal court; institute an injunction; or take other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent each unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use. To correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land, the city manager or designee may, in addition to other remedies, require that public utility service will be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-3. - Compliance. 
(a)  It is unlawful to violate the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, special exceptions or conditional uses. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-4. - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing higher standards shall govern. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-5—119-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 119-27. - Enforcement officer. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall administer and enforce this chapter and carry out the duties required. The city manager or designee may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. 
(b)  If the city manager or designee shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated, notification shall be given in writing to the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition precedent to enforcement of this chapter. The city manager or designee shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-28. - Fees, charges and expenses. 
(a)  The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for rezoning applications, building permits, variances, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city manager or designee, and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
(b)  Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-29. - Development permit. 
(a)  Required. A development permit and soil erosion permit shall be required for any proposed use of land to indicate and ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading or alteration of land commences. 
(b)  Application. All applications for development and soil erosion shall be made to the city manager or designee and shall be accompanied by complete plans, drawn to scale, signed by the author with his address, and showing all site information. 
(c)  Issuance. All development permits issued by the city manager or designee shall in no case grant any development permit for the use, construction or alteration of any land if the land as proposed to be used, constructed or altered could be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other codes and laws of the city or the state, except as provided herein. 
(d)  Duration of validity. A development permit shall be valid for one year from its issuance subject to the following provisions: If the work described in any development permit has not been begun within one year from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and if work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed within two years of the date of the issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. Written notice of the expiration shall be given to the persons affected together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed until a new development permit has been obtained. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-30. - Building permits. 
(a)  Conditions requiring permit. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered to a value of $50.00 or more without a building permit being issued by the city manager or designee. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Application. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot and of any existing buildings or structures; the shape, size, height, use, and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered; and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Approval. One copy of the layout or site plan shall be returned when approved by the city manager or designee, together with any permit to the applicant upon payment of any fee or fees as shall be determined by the city council. 
(d)  Revocation. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes void. Building permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Records to be maintained. The city manager or designee shall maintain a record of all building permits issued. 
(f)  Restrictions on issuance. No building permit shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the city unless the application for such permit has been examined by the city manager or designee certifying that the proposed building, structure or alteration complies with all provisions of this chapter. Building permits may not be issued on properties for which city taxes are delinquent. Any building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-31. - Approved plans and required conditions binding. 
Building permits or certificates of occupancy issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the city manager or designee authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and any other use, arrangement or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-32. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the city manager or designee is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  Any lot or change or extension in the use thereof. 
(2)  A building or structure hereafter erected or change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
(b)  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter or an amendment thereto, or that is changed, extended, altered or rebuilt thereafter, the certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of a building, shall be applied for, and shall be issued within five days after the erection or structural alterations of such building, or part, have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the city manager or designee shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager or designee and copies shall be furnished on request to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-33. - Administrative variances. 
Except for density and use variances, the city manager or designee shall have the power to grant administrative variances from the development standards of this chapter, where, in his opinion, the intent of the chapter can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street: Variance not to exceed ten feet. 
(2)  Side yard: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(4)  Height of building: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(5)  Distance between buildings on the same lot: Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(6)  Parking: Not to exceed ten percent of that required. Handicapped parking is excluded. 
(7)  Buffer: May reduce by 25 percent where the intent of the required buffer can be equally or otherwise achieved, if buffer is not a condition of zoning. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-34. - Major variances. 
(a)  Conditions for granting. Any variance from the requirements of this chapter and not listed in section 119-33 is a major variance. Such relief may be granted by the city council upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
(b)  Restricted to hardship. Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage of interest over similarly zoned properties. 
(c)  Application procedure. Applications for major variances will follow the same requirements set forth in division 3 of this article for documentation, notice and public hearings. 
(d)  Standards for approval. A major variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the city council that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; or 
(2)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property that adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned; and 
(3)  The application of the requirements of this chapter to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this chapter. 
(e)  Limitations on approval. In no case shall a major variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(2)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a rezoning granted by the city council. 
(3)  Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(4)  A use of land or building or structure that is not permitted by the zoning district applicable to the property. 
(5)  An increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(f)  Denial. If denied, a request for a major variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-35. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or interpretation of the city manager or designee or any other administrative official of the city made under this chapter may initiate as appeal of such decision or interpretation to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision or interpretation appealed by filing written notice with the city manager or designee and specifying fully the grounds thereof. The city manager or designee will transmit the notice to the city council for consideration in its normal course of business. 
(1)  Action by the city council. The city council, upon appeal of aggrieved party or at the request of the city manager or designee, shall: 
a.  Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any person acting under authority of this chapter, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this chapter are alleged. 
b.  Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this chapter. 
c.  Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
d.  Interpret such other provisions of this chapter as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
(2)  Temporary suspension of legal proceedings. An appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is made certifies to the city council, after notice of the appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent period to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Further appeal. A decision by the city council shall be final and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction. Such appeal must be taken within 30 days of the decision by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-36—119-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 119-59. - Establishment of planning commission. 
(a)  Membership. A planning commission is hereby established which shall consist of seven members that are appointed by council for terms of four years. Four members shall serve for a term expiring at the January planning commission meeting in the year 2006. Successors to those four members, who shall be appointed at the first council meeting in January 2006, shall serve the four-year term, expiring at the January planning commission meeting in the year of 2010. Such successors thereafter of these positions shall also serve four-year terms. Three members shall serve for a term expiring at the January planning commission meeting in the year 2008. Successors to those three members, who shall be appointed at the first council meeting in January 2008, shall serve a four-year term. 
(b)  Swearing-in. All members appointed at the January council meetings shall be sworn in by oath by mayor at the February council meetings. 
(c)  Allocation of seats. All members appointed shall be assigned to individual seats recognized by numbers of post. Post 1, Post 2, Post 3, and Post 4 shall be the seats of those members appointed to serve the term expiring in January of 2006. Post 5, Post 6, and Post 7 shall be seats of those members appointed to serve the term expiring in January of 2008. 
(d)  Qualifications. Members must be a resident of the city and have been so for one year or more. None of the members shall hold public office or other position with the city. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(e)  Chairperson; quorum. The planning commission shall elect a chairperson who shall serve a period of two years. The chairperson shall be eligible for re-election following each term. Four members and the chairperson shall constitute a quorum for conducting any business before commission. A quorum must be present in order to transact any business. The presiding chairperson shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-60. - Duties of the commission. 
The planning commission shall meet at least once each month to perform their duties as follows: 
(1)  Make preliminary review of proposed rezonings and offer suggestions for conformance to the city's desire for comprehensive land use planning. 
(2)  Review requests for rezonings, text amendments, special uses, major variances, or annexations at public hearings to obtain neighborhood input into the request. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the city council for approval, denial or conditional approval to requests. 
(4)  Initiate studies found to be necessary to provide proper planning for the future development of the city as pertains to land use, recreation, traffic routing and flow, utilities expansion, and the provision of other municipal services. Such studies must be approved by the council prior to being initiated. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-61. - Planning commission actions. 
Planning commission actions are subject to approval by the council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-62—119-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURES FOR ZONING DECISIONS AND MAJOR VARIANCES 

Sec. 119-81. - Initiation. 
(a)  Proposed by city council or property owners. From time to time, zoning decisions as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3 may be proposed by the city. Rezonings of property, special uses and major variances may be initiated by a party other than the city. Unless initiated by the city council, the owner of a majority interest in the property affected or their authorized representative shall initiate all such applications. 
(b)  Application procedures; information required. The following procedures shall be followed when a zoning decision or major variance is proposed by a party other than the city: 
(1)  Any person desiring to submit an application requesting a change in zoning district, a special use or a major variance shall file such application with a plat of the affected property and payment of the appropriate nonrefundable fee, with the city manager or designee. 
(2)  The application shall include a statement of development of the property (i.e., land use, setbacks, buffers, building height, access parking and loading) and other supporting documentation as may be required by the city manager or designee. 
(3)  An application shall be filed and required fees paid no later than the deadline as established by the city manager or designee prior to the scheduled planning commission meeting at which time the request will be heard. 
(4)  A written justification for the request, submitted in letter form, shall accompany the application. 
(5)  Names and addresses of adjoining property owners shall be provided as part of the application. 
(6)  A correct legal description of the property shall accompany the application. 
(7)  A legible sketch of the property shall accompany the application. Such plat shall include, but not be limited to, the following information and other necessary information that may be required by the city manager or designee: 
a.  A correct scale and north arrow, land lot and district, acreage and bearings and distances of all property boundaries. 
b.  The proposed land use as it would appear should the application be approved to include the following: a sketch plan drawing to scale indicating footprint of the building and layout of parking/loading spaces and points of ingress/egress. 
c.  The present zoning classification of all adjacent parcels and proposed zoning classification and/or special use of the subject parcel. 
d.  The location and extent of required buffer areas, depicting extent of natural vegetation and type and location of additional vegetation if required. 
e.  Location of the intermediate (100-year) regional floodplain and all structures within the 100-year floodplain. 
(c)  An application shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising has been published. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-82. - Staff review. 
(a)  The city manager or designee, upon receiving an application for rezoning, whether initiated by the city council or third party, a special use or a major variance, shall do the following: 
(1)  Consult with other departments of the city to fully evaluate the impact of any zoning change, special use or major variance upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to, schools, drainage, traffic and related facilities; 
(2)  Conduct a site review of property and surrounding area; 
(3)  Review each application with reference to its appropriateness and effect on existing land use and its compliance with policy and map provisions of the comprehensive plan; and 
(4)  In the case of a zoning change or special use, report its findings and recommendation to the planning commission and city council, which report shall be a matter of public record; or 
(5)  In the case of a major variance, report its findings to the planning commission and city council, which report shall be a matter of public record. 
(b)  The city manager or designee's report may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested to a less intensive use or lower density than requested or, in the case of a special use or zoning change or major variance, recommend such additional conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the application which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, health, public safety, aesthetics and general welfare secured. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-83. - Public notification. 
(a)  Legal notice. Notice of the public hearing pursuant to this division shall be published in a local paper of general circulation within the city, the legal organ in which are carried the legal advertisements of the city, advertising the application and date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing at least 15 days prior to the first public hearing but no more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing conducted by the planning commission. If the application is for amendment to the original zoning map, special use or major variance, then the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning district of the property, and the proposed district of the property. 
(b)  Signs posted. At least 15 days prior to the planning commission public hearing, the city manager or designee shall post on a conspicuous place on the property for which the application has been submitted, a sign that shall: 
(1)  Be readable from each street or road on which the property fronts, or if the property has no street frontage, from each street from which access will be gained; 
(2)  Clearly indicate: 
a.  The property's present zoning classification; 
b.  The proposed zoning classification, special use or major variance; 
c.  The date of the hearing; and 
d.  The location of the hearing. 
(3)  Be maintained by applicant to prevent removal from property or destruction during the public hearing process. 
(c)  Letters to abutting owners. The city manager or designee shall give notification of the requested application by regular mail to all abutting owners as shown by county tax records. Such notification shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the planning commission public hearing and shall include a description of the application, the date, time and place of public hearings. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-84. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Required. Before the city council may take final action on a proposed rezoning, special use or major variance, the planning commission and the city council shall each hold a public hearing on the request. 
(b)  Procedures. The public hearings shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The planning commission chair or mayor or designated appointee, who will act as presiding official, will convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The presiding official will call for each application to be presented. 
(3)  No person in attendance is to speak unless first formally recognized by the presiding official. Upon rising to speak each person is to state his name and home address. 
(4)  Time limits. The presiding official may place reasonable time limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a request, on the time allowed each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of and opposition to the request (giving equal time to both proponents and opponents). 
a.  No less than ten minutes is to be provided for all those speaking in support of the requests and no less than ten minutes is to be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. 
b.  If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at the public hearing. 
(5)  The applicant will be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the request. The applicant may then be allowed time for rebuttal if adequate time remains. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised at the hearing by opponents to the request. 
(6)  During the hearing, members of the planning commission or the city council may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(c)  Recommendation and consideration. 
(1)  The planning commission shall make its recommendation at the next regular business meeting following its public hearing. The planning commission's action may include recommendations for amendments and/or conditions of approval it deems advisable. A failure to make a recommendation shall go forward as "No Recommendation." 
(2)  At the next regular business meeting following its public hearing, the city council shall consider the application. In considering the application, action shall be taken by vote of a quorum present. 
(3)  A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by the affirmative vote of four members of the council in order for the motion to be approved. 
(4)  If a motion to approve an application fails to receive four affirmative votes, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny fails to receive four affirmative votes, another motion is in order. 
(5)  If a vote results in a tie among the councilmembers, the mayor, or vice mayor, shall cast his vote to break the tie. 
(6)  If no action is taken on an application, due to lack of a quorum, the application shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular business meeting of the city council. 
(d)  Final action. In taking final action on an application, the city council may, where appropriate: 
(1)  Approve, approve with conditions or deny the application; 
(2)  Approve or approve with conditions any portion of the area proposed for rezoning or special use or major variance thereby reducing the boundaries of the area; 
(3)  If the application is to rezone property, rezone the property or any portion to a more restrictive zoning district than that requested; 
(4)  Allow withdrawal if requested by the applicant (with or without imposing the 12-month waiting period for reconsideration); 
(5)  Table the application for consideration at a specified future regular meeting; or 
(6)  Return the application to the planning commission for further consideration. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-85. - Evaluation of zoning amendments. 
In considering applications for amendments to the zoning ordinance text or official zoning map, granting special uses or in making other zoning decisions, the following factors shall be considered by the city manager or designee, planning commission and city council: 
(1)  The impact upon the overall appearance of the city and impacts upon aesthetic conditions of adjacent parcels; 
(2)  The impact upon thoroughfare congestion and traffic safety; 
(3)  The impact upon population density and the potential for overcrowding and urban sprawl; 
(4)  The impact upon the provision of water, sewerage, transportation and other urban infrastructure services; 
(5)  The protection of property against blight and depreciation; 
(6)  Consistency with the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(7)  The impact upon adjacent property owners if the request is approved; 
(8)  The impact upon adjacent property owners if the request is not approved; 
(9)  Any other factor effecting the health, safety, morals, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-86. - Lapse of time requirement for reapplication. 
An application for rezoning or special use or major variance affecting the same property shall not be considered by the city council more often than once every 12 months from the date of action by the city council either approving or denying the request; provided, however, that the city council may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-87. - Appeals process. 
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision by the city council of the city, may take an appeal to the superior court according to procedures outlined in the Ga. Const. art. VI, § IV, ¶ I. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-88—119-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 119-118. - Restrictions. 
The lawful use of any building or structure of land existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, except that the nonconforming use shall not be: 
(1)  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
(2)  Extended to occupy a greater area of any building or structure, unless such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage of amendment of this chapter and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
(3)  Re-established after discontinuance for one year. 
(4)  Changed to another or different nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-119. - Retention of a nonconforming building or use. 
A nonconforming building or use existing at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter may be retained except as follows: 
(1)  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged or altered except in conformance with the chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(2)  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of the replacement cost of the above ground structure at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter, provided that such damage occurred as a result of fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-120. - Amortization and discontinuance. 
Certain uses of land, buildings and structures have an adverse affect on the orderly development of the community and on the general health and welfare of the citizens. Such uses can reasonably be required to cease after a reasonable time, irrespective of the general rules governing nonconforming uses. The uses which follow shall be removed, discontinued or made conforming within the specified amortization period. Said amortization period shall commence upon the serving of written notice to the owner by the city. 
(1)  Fences, walls and foliage that might constitute a hazard by virtue of impairing sight distances at a curve or intersection shall be made conforming within one calendar year. 
(2)  All provisions in business or industrial districts of this chapter setting forth specifications for the operation of a business or industry requiring fencing or visual screening shall conform within three calendar years. 
(3)  Nonconforming open storage operations, such as truck parking, automobile wrecking or salvage, salvage material storage and similar uses shall conform within two calendar years. 
(4)  Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall conform within three calendar years. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-121. - Validity of previously issued permits and approvals. 
No provision of this zoning chapter shall be construed to affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any building permit lawfully issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any amendment thereto, provided that all time constraints and any procedures for extension specified by such permit shall be observed. 
(2)  Any grading permit lawfully authorized prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any amendment thereto, provided that all time constraints and any procedures for extension specified by such permit shall be observed. 
(3)  Any development permit lawfully authorized prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any amendment thereto, upon approval of relevant construction drawings; and such development may proceed to record, provided that all time constraints and conditions relating to the approval are observed, and that the lot size and construction of buildings shall be in accordance with the area and dimensional requirements existing on the date of such approval. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-122—119-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 

Sec. 119-141. - Establishment of districts. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into districts designated as follows: 
(1)  R-44 single-family rural residential district. This district is intended to provide suitable rurally-oriented open areas and other amenities for single-family detached dwellings at low densities, with access to public water and sewer. 
(2)  R-22 single-family suburban residential district. This district is intended to provide suitable open areas for single-family, detached dwellings located in a suburban setting at low to moderate densities, with access to public water and sewer. 
(3)  R-16 single-family urban residential district (inactive). This district is intended to provide suitable areas for single-family, detached dwellings at medium densities, with access to both public water and sewer. No new applications for rezoning to this district are accepted. Properties already designated R-16 may be developed under the standards contained in this chapter. 
(4)  RM-4 multifamily residential duplex district. This district is intended to provide suitable areas for two-family dwellings at low to medium densities with access to both public water and sewer. 
(5)  RM-6 multifamily residential medium density apartments district. This district is intended to provide suitable areas for two-family and multifamily dwellings at medium densities, with access to both public water and sewer. 
(6)  RM-8 multifamily residential moderate density apartments district. This district is intended to provide suitable areas for multifamily dwellings at medium to high densities, with access to both public water and sewer. 
(7)  MHP manufactured home park district. This district is intended exclusively for the placement of manufactured homes in an environment that will provide pleasant and otherwise satisfactory living conditions and, at the same time, will not produce adverse effects upon neighboring properties. 
(8)  O and I office and institutional district. This district is intended to encourage and provide suitable areas for professional offices, hospitals, medical and dental clinics and certain related activities, with a minimum of interference from traffic and conflicting uses. 
(9)  CH commercial highway district. This district is intended to promote suitable areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the traveling public and benefit from direct access to major streets. 
(10)  CN commercial neighborhood district. This district is intended to provide suitable areas for the retailing of goods and services to surrounding residential neighborhoods. The regulations of the district are designed to reduce traffic and parking congestion to a minimum in order to protect surrounding residential areas. 
(11)  CBD commercial central business district. This district is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses that benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to the central business area, and to encourage a centralized business center for the city. 
(12)  LI light industrial district. This district is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for light industrial uses, including manufacturing, assembling, processing, wholesaling and storage by providing access to major streets and adequate public utilities, and by discouraging uses incompatible with light manufacturing. 
(13)  HI heavy industrial district. This district provides a location for those industrial operations and processes that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare, but should be located adjoining major streets. 
(14)  PUV planned urban village. This district is intended to encourage and accommodate high-quality, pedestrian-oriented, unified design and combinations of residential, commercial, office, professional services, retail and public uses and facilities in accordance with an approved master plan. The district allows for flexibility and encourages creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to best utilize special site features of topography, size or shape. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-142. - Official zoning maps. 
(a)  The city is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city manager or designee, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: 
This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the 2005 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Loganville, Georgia," [together with the date of adoption of the ordinance.] 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-143. - Amendment to maps. 
(a)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, with an entry in the minutes of such council meeting as follows: "On____________, by official action of the city council, the following (change) changes (was) were made to the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change or changes)", which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city manager or designee. No amendment to this chapter is official until such change and entry is made on said map. 
(b)  No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures for amendment as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the city manager or designee, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-144. - Replacement of official zoning map. 
(a)  In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new official zoning map, which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and said map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted ____________, 2005, as part of the Zoning Ordinance of the city of Loganville, GA." 
(b)  Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-145. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in the city, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line or the centerline of a street, a county road, a state highway, or a right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, or a right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. 
(4)  In the case of a double frontage lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the double frontage lot lies shall apply to that portion of the double frontage lot. 
(5)  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the planning commission shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-146—119-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 119-176. - Intent. 
The regulations contained in this article are intended to: 
(1)  Promote the orderly future development of the city; 
(2)  Discourage the size and type of development which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services; 
(3)  Discourage uses which because of their size or type would generate abnormal amounts of traffic on minor streets; and 
(4)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-177. - Uses common to all residential districts. 
There exist certain uses that are deemed to be compatible and acceptable when located in a residential district provided each use meets the space limits of the particular residential district. The following uses are allowed in all residential districts subject to the restrictions imposed by the district regulations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Existing single-family residences. 
b.  Existing cemeteries. 
c.  Local, state and federal government buildings. 
(2)  Accessory uses. 
a.  Accessory buildings and structures. 
b.  Home occupations. 
c.  Public parks, playgrounds and community buildings. 
d.  Subdivision recreation areas owned, operated and maintained by homeowners associations exclusively for the use of residents and their guests. 
e.  The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer, motor coach or pleasure boat, subject to provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Special uses. 
a.  Public, parochial and private schools and colleges including dormitories, convents and monasteries when located on the same site as the school or college. The minimum site shall be three acres for such facilities. 
b.  Communication towers: See article VIII of this chapter. 
c.  Churches, synagogues, chapels and other places of religious worship and instruction when located on a thoroughfare having minimum classification of at least a major collector street, and having a minimum lot area of three acres. 
d.  Country clubs, swim clubs, tennis clubs and neighborhood clubhouses, all of which shall be located on a site with not less than two acres and open to paid membership. Sleeping quarters for one caretaker, security guard, or manager shall be permitted. 
e.  Power substations and pumping stations. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-178—119-207. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 119-208. - R-44 single-family rural residential district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the R-44 single-family rural residential district. The R-44 single-family rural residential district is intended to provide suitable rurally-oriented open areas and other amenities for single-family detached dwellings at low densities, with access to public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes. 
(2)  Customary residential accessory buildings or uses, provided such shall be permitted only in a the rear yard and shall be situated not less than ten feet from any property line; and further provided that in the case of corner lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from any side street right-of-way line. These buildings shall not be used for home occupations. 
(3)  Agriculture, horticulture, dairying, general and specialized farming, including poultry raising. 
a.  No livestock, poultry or fowl shall be housed or kept on less than five acres of property. No building or pen shall be located closer than 100 feet from the property line. 
b.  Roadside stands shall offer for sale only farm products produced on the premises, provided such stand is located not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Riding stables and academies, provided that no structure or corral be located any closer than 100 feet from any property line and the lot contains a minimum of five acres with one horse plus one additional acre for each horse boarded on the premises. 
(6)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(7)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the R-44 single-family rural residential district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-209. - R-22 single-family suburban residential district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the R-22 single-family suburban residential district. The R-22 single-family suburban residential district is intended to provide suitable open areas for single-family, detached dwellings located in a suburban setting at low to moderate densities, with access to public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes. Customary residential accessory buildings or uses, provided such shall be permitted only in the rear yard and shall be situated not less than ten feet from any property line; and further provided that in case of corner lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from any side street right-of-way line. 
(2)  Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture. 
(3)  Home occupations. 
(4)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(5)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the R-22 single-family suburban residential district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-210. - R-16 single-family urban residential district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the R-16 single-family urban residential district. The R-16 single-family urban residential district is intended to provide suitable open areas for single-family, detached dwellings located in a suburban setting at low to moderate densities, with access to public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, but not including mobile homes. 
(2)  Customary residential accessory buildings or uses, provided such shall be permitted only in the rear yard and shall be situated not less than ten feet from any property line; and further provided that in case of corner lots such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 35 feet from any side street right-of-way line. 
(3)  Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(6)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the R-16 single-family urban residential district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-211. - RM-4 multifamily residential duplex district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the RM-4 district. The RM-4 district is intended to prove suitable areas for two-family dwellings at low to medium densities with access to both public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Two-family dwelling units including townhomes and condominiums (attached and detached units). 
(2)  Home occupations. 
(3)  Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture. 
(4)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(5)  Off-street parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the RM-4 multifamily residential duplex district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-212. - RM-6 multifamily residential medium-density apartment district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the RM-6 multifamily residential apartment district. The RM-6 multifamily residential apartment district is intended to provide suitable areas for two-family and multifamily dwellings at medium densities, with access to both public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the RM-4 district except noncommercial horticulture or agriculture and home occupations. 
(2)  Multifamily attached dwellings including townhomes and condominiums, but limited to four units in a single structure. 
(3)  Fee-simple townhomes provided that each unit is separated by a one-hour firewall from the foundation to the roof decking. Each structure shall be limited to four units. 
(4)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(5)  Off-street parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the RM-6 multifamily residential medium-density apartment district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-213. - RM-8 multifamily residential moderate density apartment district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the RM-8 multifamily residential moderate density apartment district. The RM-8 multifamily residential apartment district is intended to provide suitable areas for multifamily dwellings at medium to high densities, with access to both public water and sewer. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Within any RM-8 multifamily residential apartment district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the RM-6 district except that up to six units per structure shall be allowed. 
(2)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(3)  Off-street parking. See section 119-380. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the RM-8 multifamily residential moderate density apartment district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-214. - CBD commercial central business district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the CBD commercial central business district. The CBD commercial central business district is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses that benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to central business area, and to encourage a centralized business center for the city. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the O and I district, except hospitals, nursing homes and personal care homes, funeral homes, mortuaries, hospitals, and day care centers. 
(2)  Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at retail on the premises. 
(3)  Amusement and recreation centers. 
(4)  Bus terminals and taxicab stands. 
(5)  Business service establishments, such as blueprinting, duplicating and accounting. 
(6)  Communication tower. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(7)  Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and dry cleaning plants having not more than 2,000 square feet of floor space and no emission of steam. 
(8)  Newspaper offices and printing plants incidental to such offices. 
(9)  Personal service establishments, such as barbershops and beauty shops, shoe repair shops and laundromats. 
(10)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(11)  Radio and television stations, studios and offices, excluding transmission towers. 
(12)  Radio, television and appliance repair shops. 
(13)  Restaurants, grills, delicatessens and similar eating establishments, excluding drive-ins. 
(14)  Retail stores or shops, including the making of products sold at retail on the premises, providing such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business or service, occupies less than 30 percent of the total floor area, and employs not more than five operators. 
(15)  Service stations, provided that all pumps shall be located at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way or lot line; that all buildings and appurtenances are located at least 100 feet from any residential district line; and that all fuel is stored underground outside of any public right-of-way. 
(16)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(17)  Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops. 
(18)  Telephone and telegraph offices. 
(19)  Theaters, indoor. 
Specifically excluded are: 
(1)  Automobile, boat and farm implement sales. 
(2)  Food stores involving the dressing or killing of animals or fowl. 
(3)  Outside metal storage buildings. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the CBD commercial central business district: 

 
(d)  Materials for facings. Within any CBD district all building and structure faces must be finished with glass, wood, ceramics, or masonry, except for incidental metal trim, and must extend 20 feet toward the rear of building. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-215. - CN commercial neighborhood district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the CN commercial neighborhood district. The CN commercial neighborhood district is intended to provide suitable areas for the retailing of goods and services to surrounding residential neighborhoods. The regulations of the district are designed to reduce traffic and parking congestion to a minimum in order to protect surrounding residential areas. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Assembly hall and community center. 
(2)  Banks and savings and loan associations, including drive-in banks, provided that both the tellers' cages and vehicles awaiting service are located completely off the public right-of-way and provision is made off-street to accommodate a minimum of five waiting vehicles per service window. 
(3)  Bakeries, in which entire products are sold at retail on the premises. 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty parlors and similar personal service establishments. 
(5)  Boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
(6)  Books, stationery and card shops. 
(7)  Business and professional offices. 
(8)  Clothes cleaning and laundry pick-up stations. 
(9)  Clubs and lodges of a business character. 
(10)  Communication tower. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(11)  Confectionery stores. 
(12)  Convenience stores. 
(13)  Day care centers, nurseries and kindergartens. 
(14)  Drug stores and apothecary shops. 
(15)  Florist and gift shops. 
(16)  Gift and card shops. 
(17)  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, and meat market, including supermarkets, but no killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking, or smoking of food products is permitted except as normally carried on by delicatessen and meat/seafood departments in chain grocery stores. 
(18)  Laundromats. 
(19)  Medical clinics. 
(20)  Neighborhood shopping centers. 
(21)  News and tobacco stores. 
(22)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(23)  Personal service establishments such as barbershops and beauty shops and repair shops. 
(24)  Photographers (including the sale of supplies and equipment). 
(25)  Radio/television sales and service (including the sale of supplies and equipment). 
(26)  Restaurants, cafeterias, including drive-ins. 
(27)  Retail businesses selling convenience goods and primarily serving the adjacent neighborhood and its needs. 
(28)  Service stations/convenience stores, provided that pumps or similar devices shall be located at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way or lot line; that all buildings and appurtenances are located at least 100 feet from any residential district line; that all fuel is stored underground outside of any public right-of-way; and that the sale of fuel is in association with and incidental to the sale of convenience goods. 
(29)  Shoe repair shops. 
(30)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(31)  Tailors and clothing shops. 
(32)  Other uses as may be determined by the city manager or designee to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
No outside metal storage buildings are allowed. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the CN commercial neighborhood district: 

 
(d)  Materials for facings. In any CN district all building and structure faces must be finished with glass, wood, ceramics, or masonry except incidental metal trim and must extend down the side 20 feet toward the rear of building. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-216. - O and I office and institutional district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the O and I office and institutional district. The O and I office and institutional district is intended to encourage and provide suitable areas for business and professional offices, hospitals, medical and dental clinics and certain related activities, with a minimum of interference from traffic and conflicting uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Banks and financial institutions. 
(2)  Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art schools, music and dance studios, and trade schools, provided that all activities shall be enclosed. 
(3)  Business and professional offices, including medical, dental, legal, financial, architectural, providing that wholesale or retail merchandise is not offered for sale. 
(4)  Churches and associated buildings. 
(5)  Clubs and lodges catering exclusively to members and their guests. 
(6)  Communication towers. See article VIII of this chapter. Special use approval required. 
(7)  Day care centers, nurseries and kindergartens. 
(8)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(9)  Governmental offices. 
(10)  Hospitals. 
(11)  Medical and dental offices. 
(12)  Nursing homes. 
(13)  Parking, off-street. See section 119-380. 
(14)  Personal care homes. 
(15)  Pharmacies, provided that merchandise is limited to drugs, medical supplies and devices when in association with a professional medical office. 
(16)  Print shops limited to 2,000 square feet. 
(17)  Public and governmental buildings and offices. 
(18)  Retail uses normally appurtenant to office and institutional uses when located within an office building to include florist shops, cafeterias and snack shops located within office or medical buildings, pharmacies and gift shops, but excluding wholesale trade. 
(19)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(20)  Other uses may be determined by the city manager or designee to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
No outside metal storage buildings are allowed. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the O and I office and institutional district 

 
(d)  Materials for facings. Within any O and I district all buildings and structure faces must be finished with glass, wood, ceramics or masonry, except for incidental metal trim, and must extend 20 feet toward the rear of building. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-217. - CH commercial highway district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the CH commercial highway district. The CH commercial highway district is intended to promote suitable areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the traveling public and benefit from direct access to major streets. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Any use permitted in the CBD and CN districts. 
b.  Antique shops. 
c.  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, no open kennels and dog runs. 
d.  Art and school supply stores. 
e.  Art galleries. 
f.  Automotive body repair shops. 
g.  Automotive carwash (full-service or self-service). 
h.  Automotive parts stores. 
i.  Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full-service and self-service). 
j.  Automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (new). 
Automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (used). Regardless of zoning district, at least 25 percent of the inventory of each automotive sales lot that sells used vehicles must be comprised of new vehicles offered for sale. 
k.  Automotive service stations, with or without fuel pumps. 
l.  Bakeries. 
m.  Banks or financial institutions; automatic teller as accessory or freestanding use. 
n.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
o.  Bicycle shops. 
p.  Blueprinting establishments. 
q.  Boat sales establishments (new or used). 
r.  Book or stationary stores. 
s.  Building supply centers with outdoor lumberyards or storage areas, provided these areas are screened with a six-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
t.  Business colleges or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
u.  Clothing sales or rental stores. 
v.  Communication towers (see article VIII of this chapter). 
w.  Contractor's offices with outdoor storage of equipment or materials, provided the storage or equipment areas are screened with a six-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
x.  Convenience food stores with or without fuel pumps. 
y.  Custom dressmaking and sewing shops. 
z.  Dance studios. 
aa.  Day care centers, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area per child, and the outdoor play area is enclosed with a six-foot high fence. 
2.  Comply with all state day care requirements. 
3.  Comply with all health regulations. 
bb.  Department stores. 
cc.  Drive-in restaurants. 
dd.  Drug stores. 
ee.  Dry cleaning pickup and delivery stations with ten-foot pickup lane. 
ff.  Electronic sales and service establishments. 
gg.  Equipment rental, sales or service (including heavy equipment, farm equipment, bulldozers, backhoes, forklifts, cranes, etc.) enclosed by a six-foot high opaque fence. 
hh.  Florists. 
ii.  Food catering establishments. 
jj.  Food stores or grocery stores. 
kk.  Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
ll.  Furniture rental, sales or service establishments. 
mm.  Garages. 
nn.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage) enclosed with a six-foot high opaque fence. 
oo.  Gift shops. 
pp.  Group or congregate personal care homes. 
qq.  Hardware stores. 
rr.  Health clubs or spas. 
ss.  Hobby shops. 
tt.  Hotels, provided that: 
1.  All guestrooms shall be accessed through an interior hallway only. 
2.  Guestrooms shall not contain housekeeping facilities (i.e., kitchens or cooking units). 
3.  Guestrooms shall not be occupied by a "permanent resident" as defined by the hotel/motel tax provisions of this Code. 
uu.  Ice cream shops. 
vv.  Instruction of fine arts. 
ww.  Interior decorating shops. 
xx.  Jewelry stores. 
yy.  Kennels, provided no structure, which includes buildings, pens, or dog-runs, shall be located within 100 feet of any residential zoning and must abide by all county and state regulations. 
zz.  Laundries and dry cleaning establishments including self-service laundries. 
aaa.  Lawnmower repair shops. 
bbb.  Locksmith shops. 
ccc.  Log splitting and storage lots, provided splitting and storage areas are screened with a six-foot high, 100 percent opaque fence. 
ddd.  Machine, welding, radiator or muffler repair shops. 
eee.  Mobile buildings (temporary, while any of the permitted or special uses are under construction, but not to exceed six months). 
fff.  Mobile home or mobile building leasing or sales lot (new or used). 
ggg.  Museums and libraries. 
hhh.  Music stores or studios. 
iii.  Office/showroom facilities. 
jjj.  Parking lots, enclosed with a six-foot high opaque fence. 
kkk.  Pest control businesses. 
lll.  Pet shops or grooming establishments. 
mmm.  Photocopying and reproduction services. 
nnn.  Photography shops and studios. 
ooo.  Plant nursery sales facilities. 
ppp.  Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers. 
qqq.  Radio and television repair shops. 
rrr.  Record/video sales and rental stores. 
sss.  Recreation facilities (indoor, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, and movie theaters, and commercial outdoor, such as miniature golf courses, driving ranges, water slides or drive-in theaters). 
ttt.  Recovered materials processing facility, principal, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compaction and shipping. 
2.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), there shall be a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
3.  No such facility shall be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for residential use. 
4.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
5.  All materials collected shall not be visible once deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully enclosed building. 
6.  Any outside storage areas shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high, opaque fence. 
uuu.  Restaurants and lounges. 
vvv.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
www.  Small appliance repair shops. 
xxx.  Sporting good stores. 
yyy.  Tailor shops. 
zzz.  Taxidermists. 
aaaa.  Taxicab or limousine services. 
bbbb.  Toy shops. 
cccc.  Travel agencies. 
dddd.  Vehicle rental establishments. 
eeee.  Watch and clock repair shops. 
ffff.  Weaving apparel shops. 
gggg.  Yard trimmings composting facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves and grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals or similar products. 
2.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, there shall be a three-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(2)  Office uses. 
a.  Accounting offices. 
b.  Architecture or engineering offices. 
c.  Doctor, dentist or chiropractor offices. 
d.  Insurance offices. 
e.  Law offices. 
f.  Medical clinics. 
g.  Other public or professional offices. 
h.  Real estate offices. 
(3)  Public and semipublic uses. 
a.  Churches, temples and synagogues. 
b.  Clubs, lodges, fraternal institutions and meeting halls. 
c.  Government offices. 
d.  Post offices. 
e.  Public or semipublic buildings and land uses, parks, playgrounds or community centers. 
f.  Utility offices. 
(4)  Residential. 
a.  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
(c)  Accessory uses. No outside metal storage buildings allowed. 
(d)  Special uses. Within the CH commercial highway district, the following uses may be permitted provided the applicant for such a development is approved as a special use by the city council after receiving recommendations from the director of planning and development and the planning commission and after a public hearing. 
(1)  Any retail or service establishment not specifically permitted herein, but which is similar to the listed uses, compatible with uses on adjoining property and which meets the intent and purpose of the district. 
(2)  Residential or community shelters. 
(e)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the CH commercial highway district: 

 
(f)  Materials for facings. Within any CH district all building and structure faces must be finished with glass, metal composite materials, wood, ceramics, or masonry except for incidental metal trim (non-MCM) and must extend down each side 20 feet toward the rear of building. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2); Ord. of 7-9-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 119-218. - LI light industrial district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the LI light industrial district. The LI light industrial district is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for light industrial uses, including manufacturing assembling, processing, wholesaling and storage by providing access to major streets and adequate public utilities, and by discouraging uses incompatible with light manufacturing. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Any industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations or the storage and sale of heavy material, products or equipment, but not including junk or salvage yards or uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, or other objectionable conditions to nearby areas. 
(2)  Accessory uses and structures, customary, when located on the same lot as the main structure, excluding, however, open storage. 
(3)  Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, excluding open kennels and dog runs. 
(4)  Apparel manufacturing plants. 
(5)  Automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (new). 
Automotive sales lots and associated service facilities (used). Regardless of zoning district, at least 25 percent of the inventory of each automotive sales lot that sells used vehicles must be comprised of new vehicles offered for sale. 
(6)  Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared foods and miscellaneous food products. 
(7)  Bottling plants. 
(8)  Cabinet shops. 
(9)  Cold storage, ice plants and freezer lockers. 
(10)  Communications towers. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(11)  Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing, 
(12)  Day care centers operated in direct association with adjoining industry. 
(13)  Distribution of products and merchandise. 
(14)  Dry cleaning and laundering establishments. 
(15)  Electrical appliances and equipment, sales and repairs, but excluding open storage. 
(16)  Electronics manufacturing and assembly plants. 
(17)  Fabricating shops such as cabinets, upholstery and sheet metal shops. 
(18)  Garages, repair shops and machine shops. 
(19)  Kennels, provided no structure, including buildings, pens, or dog-runs shall be located within 100 feet of any residential zoning and must abide by all county and state regulations. 
(20)  Mini-warehouses/storage lots. No sale of merchandise shall be conducted on the property. 
(21)  Office/distribution facilities. 
(22)  Office/warehouse facilities. 
(23)  Parking. See section 119-380. 
(24)  Plumbing shops. 
(25)  Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments. 
(26)  Processing and compounding of materials. 
(27)  Residence for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use. 
(28)  Sales or service of boat trailers, manufactured homes, travel trailers, motor coaches and heavy equipment. 
(29)  Scientific or research laboratories. 
(30)  Service stations, provided that all pumps shall be located at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way or lot line, that all buildings and appurtenances are located at least 100 feet from any residential district line, and all fuel is stored underground outside of any public right-of-way. 
(31)  Sign painting and fabricating shops. 
(32)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(33)  Storage, inside. 
(34)  Textile manufacturing plants. 
(35)  Tile recapping and re-treading shops. 
(36)  Truck and bus terminals. 
(37)  Wholesaling or warehousing including mini-warehouse. 
(c)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the LI light industrial district: 

 
(d)  Supplemental requirements. 
(1)  All service drives and access roads and parking areas shall be paved and curbed. 
(2)  All storage operations shall be enclosed with a six-foot opaque fence. 
(3)  Provisions shall be made for the adequate lighting of all parking areas and service drives. 
(4)  Any face of any building or structure fronting on a public right-of-way must have a full facade consisting of glass, wood, ceramics or masonry, except for incidental metal trim, and must extend 20 feet down the sides toward the rear of building. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2); Ord. of 7-9-2015, § 3) 
Sec. 119-219. - HI heavy industrial district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the HI heavy industrial district. The HI heavy industrial district provides a location for those industrial operations and processes that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The heavy industrial district shall be located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway. 
(b)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  All uses permitted in the LI light industrial district. 
(2)  Aircraft factory. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage plant/distillery. 
(4)  Assembly plant (durable goods). 
(5)  Communication towers. See article VIII of this chapter. 
(6)  Concrete or masonry plant. 
(7)  Chemical plant. 
(8)  Crematory. 
(9)  Die-casting works. 
(10)  Feed processing plant. 
(11)  Fertilizer plant. 
(12)  Kennels provided no structure, including buildings, pens, or dog-runs, shall be located within 100 feet of any residential zoning and must abide by all county and state regulations. 
(13)  Manufacturing, outdoor. 
(14)  Metal smelting/forging works. 
(15)  Mini-warehouse/storage lots. 
(16)  Stadium/concert hall/amphitheater (county board of education schools excepted). 
(17)  Rubber tire re-treading plants. 
(18)  Sugar refinery. 
(19)  Tannery—leather processing. 
(20)  Wood chipping/shredding, and yard trimmings composting facility, provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves and grass clippings or similar putrescence vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals or similar materials. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, a three-foot-high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot-high, 100-percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(21)  All other industrial uses that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the public health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. In determining whether an industrial use meets these criteria, and whether the proposed use is appropriate for the specific site, the following criteria should be considered: 
a.  The proximity of the proposed use to existing residential structures or residentially zoned property; 
b.  Whether the proposed use will generate pollutants of the air or water and, if so, the method proposed by the applicant for insuring that the proposed use will comply with all state and federal environmental regulations; 
c.  Whether the proposed use will generate excessive traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, radiation, or create a fire or explosion hazard which may be objectionable due to proximity to surrounding structures, or which will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
d.  How neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any proposed structure; and 
e.  Whether the use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, would be compatible with surrounding land uses and would not be in conflict with the overall general objectives of the comprehensive land use plan. 
(c)  Special uses. 
(1)  The following criteria shall also be addressed for the grant of a special use within the HI heavy industrial district: 
a.  The proximity of the proposed use to existing residential structures or residentially zoned property; 
b.  Whether the proposed use will generate pollutants of the air or water and, if so, the method proposed by the applicant for insuring that the proposed use will comply with all state and federal environmental regulations; 
c.  Whether the proposed use will generate excessive traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, radiation, or create a fire or explosion hazard which may be objectionable due to proximity to surrounding structures, or which will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
d.  How neighboring properties may be affected by the height of any proposed structure; and 
e.  Whether the use would be consistent with the needs of the neighborhood or the community as a whole, would be compatible with surrounding land uses and would not be in conflict with the overall general objectives of the comprehensive land use plan. 
(2)  Within HI heavy industrial district, the following uses may be permitted, provided the applicant for such development is granted special use approval by the city council after receiving recommendations from the city manager or designee and the planning commission and after a public hearing: 
a.  Asphalt plant. 
b.  Bulk storage tanks including natural gas or fuel storage stations. No above ground storage facilities may be located closer than 500 feet to a residential district. All storage is to be subject to approval of the city manager or designee. 
c.  Composting facility. 
d.  Explosives plant/storage. 
e.  Landfills, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  A minimum 200-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between all active waste burial areas and exterior property lines, except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
2.  A minimum 75-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between non-waste disposal operations and exterior property lines, except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
3.  The limits of any 100-year floodplain or a stream buffer of 200 feet, whichever is greater, shall be preserved as natural, undisturbed areas, except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
4.  The entire site shall be fenced with a minimum six-foot-high chainlink security fence. 
5.  The landfill shall be located on or have direct private access to a major collector, minor arterial, major arterial or principal arterial. 
6.  The applicant shall include with the special use application a report detailing the phasing of the landfill and plans for closure and reclamation. 
7.  The following waste disposal/recycling facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses to landfills meeting the above standards: 
(i)  Composting, municipal solid waste. 
(ii)  Composting yard trimmings. 
(iii)  Gas recovery/gas co-generation plant. 
(iv)  Recovered materials processing facility. 
(v)  Solid waste transfer stations. 
f.  Paper/pulp mill. 
g.  Petroleum refinery/processing plant. 
h.  Quarry for the removal of minerals and other natural materials, together with necessary buildings, machinery and appurtenances thereto, provided that: 
1.  Quarry area being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten feet back from the edge of any excavation and of such constructions and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
2.  The operators and owners of the quarry present to the council an acceptable comprehensive plan for the reuse of the property at the cessation of the quarry operations. 
3.  A quarry shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a residential or commercial zoning district boundary line. 
i.  Retail and service uses. 
j.  Salvage operation and junkyard providing the following conditions are met: 
1.  The junkyard is located no closer than 300 feet to a residential or commercial zoning district boundary line. 
2.  The junkyard is completely enclosed with a solid fence not projecting into the right-of-way of any roadway adjoining said junkyard, not less than eight feet high and in no case less than such height as will effectively screen all storage and other operations from view. 
3.  The junkyard is located no closer than 100 feet from the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any major arterial roadway, within the city limits, having a right-of-way of 80 feet or greater. 
k.  Scrap tire processing plant. 
l.  Solid waste transfer station. 
m.  Waste incineration facility. 
n.  Adult entertainment facility, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  An adult entertainment facility shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet to another adult entertainment facility. The measurement of distance for purposes of this subsection (c)(2)n.1 shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless to any customary or common route or path of travel. 
2.  An adult entertainment facility shall not be located on property that is within 1,000 feet of a residential district. The measurement of distance for purposes of this subsection (c)(2)n.2 shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless to any customary or common route or path of travel. 
3.  An adult entertainment facility shall be located no closer than 1,000 feet from any governmental facility, church, residence, park, library, school ground, or college campus. The measurement of distance for purposes of this subsection (c)(2)n.3 shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless to any customary or common route or path of travel. 
(d)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the HI heavy industrial district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-220. - MHP manufactured home district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. The provisions of this section apply to the MHP manufactured home district. This zoning district is intended exclusively for the placement of manufactured homes in an environment that will provide pleasant and otherwise satisfactory living conditions and, at the same time, will not produce adverse effects upon neighboring properties. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Lots are leased with no retail or service establishments allowed in this district. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  Location. A manufactured home district development shall front, for a sufficient distance to provide safe access, upon a state highway or a major street and shall have access and egress only on such road. 
(2)  Street access requirements. The entrance road to a manufactured home district development shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet with a minimum pavement width of 28 feet (back of curb to back of curb). The entrance road shall have a turning radius from the highway of at least 30 feet and the entrance road shall extend at least 100 feet into the manufactured home district development. No manufactured home site shall front on or access any fronting street outside of the manufactured home park. 
(3)  Size. A manufactured home district development shall have a minimum buildable area of at least 25 contiguous acres. 
(4)  Density. A manufactured home district development shall have a density of not more than four manufactured home lots per buildable acre. 
(5)  Manufactured home lots. Each manufactured home shall be located on a separate manufactured home lot. 
(6)  Prior approval. No site construction shall take place until preliminary subdivision plat and construction plans and specifications are approved. No site construction shall be undertaken and no permits shall be issued until a preliminary subdivision plat and construction plans and specifications that meet the requirements of the development regulations and the requirements of this zoning resolution have been given approval. 
(7)  Certificates of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for the placing of a manufactured home in a manufactured home park district development shall be issued until at least 20 manufactured home lots which have been developed in accordance with an officially approved and recorded final subdivision plat of that phase are ready for occupancy. 
(8)  Skirting or underpinning. All manufactured homes shall be skirted or similar measures must be provided for on the manufactured home to fully enclose the space between the unit and the ground. 
(9)  Separate utilities. All manufactured homes shall be metered individually for utilities, and each shall be individually connected to the sewer system. 
(10)  Signs. See chapter 111. 
(d)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for the MHP manufactured home district: 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-221. - PUV planned urban village district. 
(a)  Scope and purpose. 
(1)  The provisions of this section apply to the PUV planned urban village district. 
(2)  The planned urban village (PUV) district is intended to encourage and accommodate high-quality, pedestrian oriented, unified design and combinations of retail, office, institutional, cultural, public and residential uses and facilities in accordance with an approved master plan. The district allows for flexibility and encourages creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to best utilize special site features of topography, size or shape. 
(3)  The PUV district is intended to: 
a.  Promote more efficient and economic uses of land while respecting historic context and landscape features. 
b.  Encourage land uses that reduce transportation need and that conserve energy and natural resources to the maximum extent possible. 
c.  Encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment with emphasis on street level commercial and/or cultural activities. 
d.  Encourage institutional, cultural, office, retail and residential uses in a mixed-use, urban setting with uses in close proximity to maximize opportunities for pedestrian traffic, thereby reducing the need for automobile dependency and demand for parking. 
e.  Preserve, to the greatest extent possible, and incorporate in harmonious fashion, mature trees and unique topographic and hydrologic features of the site. 
f.  Create a "main street" atmosphere with wide sidewalks and associated public spaces and amenities, providing access to a variety of commercial, civic, residential, recreational and pedestrian uses and activities. 
(b)  Applicability; eligibility. Properties proposed for designation as a PUV shall contain a minimum of ten acres but in no case shall be larger than 100 acres. The proposed site must have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on and access to at least one arterial or major collector road as classified by the joint Walton County Comprehensive Plan or the Gwinnett County Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Unified control/ownership. All land included for the purpose of development within a planned urban village district shall be owned by or under the complete control of the applicant for such zoning designation, whether the applicant is an individual, corporation, or other entity, group or agency. Unified control shall be maintained throughout the development and construction of all phases of the project. 
(d)  Detailed master plan required. 
(1)  Development in this district requires approval by the mayor and council of a detailed master plan that shall become a condition of zoning approval. All development shall be in substantial conformance to the approved master plan. Substantial deviations from or modifications to the approved master plan, as determined by the director of planning and development, shall require city council approval. 
(2)  The detailed master plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Location of: 
1.  Buildings and their principal uses; 
2.  Public streets and private roadways; 
3.  Parking areas; 
4.  Open spaces, plazas, squares, courtyards, and other landscaped or green spaces; 
5.  Pedestrian and/or bicycle pathways; 
6.  Stormwater facilities. 
b.  Design guidelines that address: 
1.  Overall architectural character illustrated through typical building elevations; 
2.  Public plazas, open spaces and buffer areas; 
3.  Relationship to adjacent properties; 
4.  Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks; 
5.  Construction materials and color themes; 
6.  Coordinated signage and graphics; 
7.  Streetscapes, including street trees and furniture such as benches and light standards; 
8.  Parking area landscaping. 
(e)  Permitted uses. Planned urban village developments shall contain at least three principal uses, including at least one residential type. The principal uses permitted in the district are: 
(1)  Retail sales and services, including open-air markets; 
(2)  Eating and drinking establishments; 
(3)  Banks, financial and professional services; 
(4)  Residential flats or lofts above the ground floor in a mixed-use buildings; 
(5)  Townhouses; 
(6)  Business and professional offices; 
(7)  Personal services, dry cleaners, salons, etc.; 
(8)  Medical and dental offices; 
(9)  Veterinary offices without boarding or outdoor runs or kennels; 
(10)  Health clubs and spas; 
(11)  Indoor recreation and entertainment; 
(12)  Parking structures; 
(13)  Craft shops, visual and performing artist studios and galleries, with accessory light manufacturing; 
(14)  Hotel and bed and breakfast inns; 
(15)  Religious facilities; 
(16)  Clubs, lodges or fraternal institutions; 
(17)  Theaters and performing arts uses; 
(18)  Civic, cultural, open space and public uses; 
(19)  Accessory uses customary to any permitted use. 
(f)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the district: 
(1)  Automotive, boat, recreational vehicle, or equipment sales or rental; 
(2)  Automotive body, radiator, muffler, or transmission repair shops; 
(3)  Drive-through service windows; 
(4)  Telecommunication towers; 
(5)  Contractor's offices; 
(6)  Indoor or outdoor storage or warehousing; 
(7)  Garden supply centers and greenhouses; 
(8)  Group or congregate personal care homes; 
(9)  Kennels; 
(10)  Machine, welding or small engine repair shops; 
(11)  Recovered materials processing or composting; 
(12)  Residential or community shelter. 
(g)  Site design standards. 
(1)  Maximum floor area ratios (FAR). 
a.  Nonresidential uses: 0.4. 
b.  Residential uses: 0.2. 
(2)  Height of buildings (not including cupolas, towers or other roofline projections). 
a.  Minimum height, all buildings: Two stories or 25 feet, except that freestanding restaurants may be one story. 
b.  Maximum height, townhouses: Three stories or 35 feet. 
c.  Maximum height, nonresidential or mixed use: Five stories or 65 feet. 
d.  Where adjacent to property zoned for single-family use, buildings shall be set back from the property line 1.5 feet for each foot in height. 
(3)  Minimum/maximum floor areas and building lengths. 
a.  Residential. 
1.  Flats or lofts: Minimum of 900 square feet with an average of 1,100 square feet. Residential units and nonresidential uses shall not occupy the same floor in a mixed-use building. 
2.  Townhouses: Minimum 1,200 square feet. There shall be no more than eight units attached in an individual building. 
b.  Nonresidential. 
1.  Maximum building footprint: 25,000 square feet. No individual nonresidential or mixed-use building shall exceed 300 feet along its greatest length. 
(4)  Building placement and massing. 
a.  Building location, design and orientation shall substantially conform to the approved master plan. Large parking lots in front of buildings along the street frontage are prohibited. Buildings fronting streets, principal drives or travel ways shall have no more than one row of parking in front of them. 
b.  Site layout shall reinforce the street edge and create pedestrian-scaled open spaces. The overall design for vehicular circulation shall be a modified grid pattern with the use of alleys where appropriate. 
c.  Buildings shall be placed perpendicular and parallel to streets, drives and travel ways. 
d.  Building fronts and entries shall be articulated and oriented toward streets, drives or travel ways and arranged to created courtyards, plazas and other human-scale spaces. Where possible, buildings shall be arranged to provide views and access to open spaces. 
e.  Where public streets are included within the development, buildings shall be located no more than 15 feet from the right-of-way. 
(5)  Streetscape amenities. 
a.  Within the project boundaries, public streets, drives and travel ways shall have provided street landscaping and furnishings such as lamps, bicycle racks, seating and other furniture, litter containers, etc. 
b.  Landscaping shall include trees of a shade-producing variety in a number equal to at least one tree per 35 feet of length of public streets, drives and travel ways. Trees may be clustered to create a more natural appearance. 
(6)  Open space and landscaping. 
a.  A minimum of 20 percent of the total project area shall consist of open space and landscaping. 
b.  Permanent water impoundments, wetlands and other environmentally sensitive areas may account for no more than 50 percent of the required open space. 
c.  The required open space shall include at least one centrally located primary common space consisting of at least 20,000 square feet. 
d.  Where adjacent to single-family zoned property along the project exterior, a 30-foot buffer shall be provided. Otherwise, a landscape strip of at least ten feet in width is required. 
e.  Buffers shall be natural and undisturbed except for supplemental planting where sparsely vegetated. 
f.  Natural tree cover shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. 
g.  Landscape strips shall include trees of a shade-producing variety in a number equal to at least one tree per 35 feet of length along exterior boundaries. Trees may be clustered to create a more natural appearance. 
(7)  Parking and loading. 
a.  Parking shall be calculated for the development as a whole using on the ratios established in section 119-380. On-site parking shall be provided at a minimum of 80 percent of the calculated total for nonresidential uses and 100 percent of the total for residential uses. 
b.  Parking located in front of buildings facing public streets, principal drives or travel ways may be either parallel or front-in. 
c.  Required parking for residential uses must be located within 150 feet of the use served. 
d.  Surface parking adjacent to public streets, principal drives or travel ways shall be screened by any combination of grade change, earthen berm, decorative fence/wall and vegetation to a height of 42 inches above the grade of the parking. 
e.  Landscaped islands are required at the end of each parking aisle. 
f.  A maximum of 12 parking spaces are permitted in a row before relieved by a landscaped island. 
g.  Landscaped islands shall extend the full length of the parking stall. Landscaped strips between aisles shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
h.  Every landscaped island shall have at least one tree of a shade-producing variety. The total number of trees within an individual lot shall be equal to at least one tree per ten spaces. 
i.  Off-street loading and service areas shall not face and must be screened from public streets, principal drives, travel ways and public spaces by walls at least six feet in height or evergreen plan materials capable of reaching a height of six feet within 18 months of installation. 
(h)  Architectural guidelines. 
(1)  Exterior building materials. 
a.  A minimum of 90 percent of the exterior (excluding windows) of all buildings shall consist of two or more of the following materials: 
1.  Brick, natural stone or tile; 
2.  Genuine stucco, if placed at least ten feet above grade level; 
3.  Cultured or cast stone; 
4.  Architecturally finished block; 
5.  Fiber cement board; 
6.  LEED-certified materials. 
b.  Accent materials shall not include aluminum or vinyl siding, unfinished concrete block, reflective glass (unless to comply with LEED) or galvanized steel. 
c.  A minimum of two different materials shall be used on each building. 
d.  Individual buildings shall present a consistent appearance on all elevations. 
(2)  Roof design and materials. 
a.  Roofs may be pitched or flat. 
b.  Pitched roofs of nonresidential or mixed-use buildings shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12 and pitched roofs of residential buildings shall have a minimum pitch of 6:12; except that that roofs covering porches are exempt from this requirement. Roofs with pitches between 4:12 and 6:12 shall have a projecting eave of not less than two feet measured horizontally from the vertical wall. Mansard roofs shall have a pitch of not less than 1:1. 
c.  Flat roofs require parapet screening conforming to the vertical articulation requirements for the facade and cornice detailing. 
d.  Materials for pitched roofs shall be of: 
1.  Twenty-five-year dimensional asphalt or industry-approved synthetic shingle; 
2.  Standing seam metal; 
3.  Clay or concrete tile; 
4.  Slate; 
5.  LEED-certified materials. 
e.  Rooftop equipment shall be screened from view at ground level on adjacent public streets, drives, travel ways or public spaces. 
(3)  Design features for nonresidential and mixed-use buildings. 
a.  All buildings shall incorporate a minimum of four of the following features. Buildings with a length of 200 feet or greater shall incorporate at minimum of six design features: 
1.  Canopies, archways, covered walkways or porticos; 
2.  Awnings; 
3.  Arcades; 
4.  Courtyards; 
5.  Cupolas; 
6.  Balconies; 
7.  Tower elements; 
8.  Recesses, projections, columns, pilasters projecting from the plane, offsets, or projecting ribs used to define architectural or structural bays; 
9.  Varied roof heights; 
10.  Articulated cornice line; 
11.  Display windows, faux windows or decorative glass windows; 
12.  Architectural details such as tile work, molding or accent materials integrated into the building facade; 
13.  Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping, seating areas or outdoor patios; 
14.  Other similar features approved as part of the detailed master plan. 
b.  All ground floor entrances shall be covered or inset. 
c.  Buildings over 100 feet in length shall incorporate elements such as arcades, porticos, porches, alcoves or awnings for a minimum of 50 percent of the length of the building frontage along a street or travel way. 
d.  Facades adjacent to or facing a street, travel way or public space shall include changes in relief through offsets, varied roof heights, columns, fenestration and materials, with at least one per distance equal to three times the building height. 
e.  At least 40 percent but not more than 75 percent of each facade adjacent to and facing a street, travel way or public space shall contain windows or doorways. For mixed-use buildings, floors that contain only residential uses may have a minimum of 25 percent of the facade facing streets, travel ways and public spaces in windows and doorways. 
f.  Ground floor retail, service and restaurant uses shall have large pane display windows above a lower wall section between 24 and 36 inches in height. 
g.  Each residential unit in a mixed-use building shall have a balcony or bay. 
(4)  Design features for townhouses. 
a.  Buildings that consist of townhouse units shall utilize a minimum of four of the following design features: 
1.  Dormers; 
2.  Cupolas; 
3.  Gables; 
4.  Recessed entries; 
5.  Balconies; 
6.  Covered front porches of at least seven feet in depth and ten feet in length; 
7.  Courtyards; 
8.  Box windows; 
9.  Exterior chimneys; 
10.  Varied roof heights; 
11.  Porticos; 
12.  Shutters; 
13.  Articulated cornice lines; 
14.  Other similar features approved as part of the detailed master plan. 
b.  All sides of a building will display a similar level of quality and architectural detailing. The majority of a building's architectural features shall not be limited to a single facade. 
c.  Within each row or cluster, each unit shall be differentiated by two or more of the following methods: 
1.  Use of distinct color variation between individual units; 
2.  Use of distinct variations in materials between individual units; 
3.  Use of distinct variations in architectural style or features, such as a porch or similar feature, between individual units; 
4.  Use of distinct variations in roof form; or 
5.  A variation in the plane of the front facade to provide a minimum three-foot variation between individual units. 
d.  Garages: 
1.  Front-loading garages are prohibited. 
2.  Side-loading garages shall provide windows or other architectural details that mimic the features of the living portion of the unit on the side of the garage in line with the front facade. Side-loading garage doors shall not exceed ten feet in width. 
3.  Garage openings shall not occupy more than 45 percent of a unit's side facade. 
4.  At least 20 feet of driveway shall be provided between garage openings and sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-222—119-248. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

Sec. 119-249. - Open space subdivision. 
In the R-22 district, the minimum lot size, lot width and yards may be reduced upon special use approval by the city council for the development of a single-family, detached development that provides for the preservation, maintenance and restricted use of open space. The specific design standards for each development shall be established as conditions of special use approval by the city council, subject to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Uses. 
a.  Permitted principal uses: single-family detached dwellings, not including mobile homes, and principal uses common to all residential districts. 
b.  Permitted accessory uses: accessory uses common to all residential districts. 
c.  Special uses: special uses common to all residential districts upon approval by the city council. 
(2)  Space limits. Following are the space limits for overlay districts: 

 
(3)  Design criteria. 
a.  Maximum density: 2.8 units per acre. 
b.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit: 1,700 square feet. 
c.  Garage: Attached or detached garage for at least two automobiles is required. 
d.  Exterior materials. 
1.  Front exterior elevations shall have at least 75 percent of their surface clad in brick, stone or stucco. 
2.  All other exterior elevations shall have at least 75 percent of their surface clad in brick, stone or fiber cement board. 
3.  Accent siding materials shall be of fiber cement type. 
e.  Chimneys. When located on an exterior wall, chimneys shall extend to the ground. 
f.  Landscaping. All grassed areas shall be covered with sod. 
g.  Trees. 
1.  At least one over-story shade tree, two inches or greater in diameter as measured four feet from ground level, shall be planted or preserved in the front and rear yards of each lot. 
2.  Trees shall not be planted closer than 13 feet from the back of curb along streets. 
h.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks are required and shall be constructed in conformance with the development regulations of the city. 
i.  Utilities. 
1.  The development must be served by public water and sewer systems. 
2.  All utilities must be placed underground. 
j.  Open space. 
1.  At least 25 percent of the development's gross area shall be preserved as open space. 
2.  At least 90 percent of the minimum required open space shall remain natural and undisturbed. 
3.  No more than five percent of the minimum required open space may be covered in impervious surface, including walking trails or play areas. 
4.  No more than 50 percent of a lake or pond may be credited toward minimum open space requirements. 
5.  Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private streets, or any land that has been or is proposed to be conveyed to any public agency. 
6.  Any land within a required recreation facility, utility easement or stormwater detention facility shall not be credited toward the minimum open space requirement. 
7.  Open space shall not be less than 30 feet wide at any point. 
8.  Open space shall be subject to permanent conservation restriction and legal title shall be held by a mandatory incorporated homeowners association or, in the case of natural and undisturbed areas within the open space, title to may be held by a land trust or conservation organization authorized for such purpose and recognized by the city. 
k.  Homeowners association. 
1.  A mandatory homeowners association shall be established for the maintenance of all stormwater detention facilities and for other common facilities and areas, including open spaces, to which it holds title. 
2.  Prior to final plat approval, a copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the association and the covenants to be recorded shall be provided to the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-250—119-276. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 119-277. - Compliance with district regulations. 
(a)  No building, structure, land or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No existing building, with a change of occupancy, shall be occupied until an inspection by the city manager or designee has been performed for conformity with the provisions of this chapter by the new use. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-278. - Structures, uses to be on lot of record. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot of record as defined by this chapter except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-279. - Height and density. 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height limits of this chapter; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or be in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-280. - Yard and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building except as specifically provided herein. No part of a lot that is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-281. - One principal residential building on a lot. 
(a)  Within residential districts, exempting group developments, not more than one principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. 
(b)  In nonresidential districts, more than one structure housing a principal permitted use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-282. - Minimum lot sizes for residences using septic tank systems. 
No single-family residence shall be permitted on a lot of less than one acre of usable land when it is to be served by septic tanks, regardless of the zoning district classification. The Walton or Gwinnett County Board of Health will evaluate each individual request for a permit on a case-by-case basis. All septic tanks must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-283. - Reduction of lot area. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, no lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located, unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-284. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this chapter, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
(1)  Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a nonapproved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application, and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots shall be re-platted or re-parceled so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage and area requirements of the district. 
(2)  Lots not meeting minimum lot size requirements. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform with the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-285. - Landlocked lots. 
In the event there exists a landlocked lot, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the property owner shall be entitled to only one building permit, provided: 
(1)  No other principal building exists or is being constructed on said property; 
(2)  No other valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and is currently valid; 
(3)  The property was and continues to be under single ownership since the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
(4)  The property owner has acquired a 30-foot access easement to a publicly maintained street, and said easement has been duly recorded and made a part of the property deed; and 
In the event said property is divided, no additional permits will be issued. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-286. - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least a distance of 40 feet upon an open street which shall be either a public street, publicly maintained street, or a publicly approved street. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-287. - City and county approvals that are required. 
All city and county approvals that are required for the use of land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted with a request for a building permit, an occupancy permit, a zoning amendment or a variance. Except as otherwise required by state law, no local action shall be taken and no public hearing shall be held until the above-required approvals have been obtained by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-288. - Approvals for residential, commercial and industrial developments on state highways. 
For all residential, commercial and industrial developments fronting on a state highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the state department of transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-289. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building that is legally under construction or for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the construction of which shall be diligently pursued until completion. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-290. - Development projects under construction. 
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in development or proposed use of properties which are legally under construction or for which a development plan or preliminary plat has been approved as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter provided that construction shall commence within one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-291. - Accessory uses or structures. 
(a)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in side or rear yards, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted if they meet the following: 
(1)  Residential lots of one acre or less shall be allowed a swimming pool and one other accessory structure of a different type. Surrounding decks along with any associated equipment room, cabana, pool house, gazebo, pergola, etc., constructed at the same time and under the same permit as the swimming pool are not considered separate structures for the purposes of this section. 
(2)  Residential lots larger than one acre shall be allowed a swimming pool and one other accessory structure of a different type, and one additional accessory structure for each full acre in excess of one acre. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall comply with front yard set back and be set back not less than ten feet from side and rear yard. 
(4)  An accessory structure located on one acre or less shall not be any larger than 18 feet by 24 feet. An accessory garage shall be used solely to house vehicles and other accessory items such as garden tools, lawn mowers, weed eaters, carpenter tools, etc., as related to residential use. 
(5)  Accessory structures located on property in excess of one acre or more will not be restricted to size, provided the structure meets all city codes and other requirements of this chapter and is clearly subordinate to the principal structure. 
(6)  Accessory structures in residential districts shall not be used for any type of commercial operation whether permanent, parttime or as part of a home occupation. Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not be used for the storage or warehousing of bulk items, such as food, clothing, furniture, household supplies, automobile parts, building materials, landscaping supplies, and large quantities of items not listed. 
(7)  No accessory structure shall exceed a height of 15 feet to the top of the ridge board. 
(8)  Detached accessory structure shall be located at least 15 feet from the principal structure on a lot. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-292. - Requirements for moving a building. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be relocated in the city unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements of this chapter and other city code requirements, and prior to the transportation of the structure the relocation must be approved and permitted by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-293. - Temporary building. 
A temporary building or building for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision or development shall be permitted on the land of the project during the construction period. Temporary buildings related to a subdivision or development shall be removed when 95 percent of all lots are occupied by completed homes or within four years, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-294. - Accessory swimming pools. 
Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a security fence of a minimum height of five feet with a gate containing a self-closing positive latch device to ensure that the pool is enclosed at all times. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-295. - Other swimming pools. 
Any constructed or prefabricated pool used other than in conjunction with a private residence requires health department approval. All pools shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of five feet with all gates containing a self-closing latch device to ensure the pool is enclosed at all times. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-296. - Parking or storage of major recreational equipment. 
For purposes of this chapter, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. Such major recreational equipment may be parked or stored only in side yards or rear yards or in a carport or enclosed building; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. In the case of a corner lot, no vehicles may be parked or stored in the side yard on the street side of the lot. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-297. - Parking and storage of commercial vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicles in excess of 2,000 pounds load capacity, as identified or classified or defined by the manufacturer, in any area within the corporate limits of the city zoned residential for any period longer than six hours, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. However, trailers, mobile homes, motorized homes, boats, boat trailers and utility trailers are exempted from this section. For purposes of this section, trailers are defined as vehicles with or without motive power, other than pole trailers, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by motor vehicles and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-298. - Abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles and miscellaneous materials. 
It shall be prohibited in all residentially zoned districts to park or store abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material in quantity. For the purposes of this section, an abandoned vehicle shall be a vehicle without a valid, current state license plate or which is discarded, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled, partially dismantled or without a valid license plate attached thereto. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-299. - Sale of vehicles. 
No vehicles shall be parked in a commercial parking lot or place of business offered for sale, except in designated car sales lots. Cars will be towed at owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-300. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Permitted. A home occupation as defined by this section shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(1)  Only residents of the dwelling containing the home occupation may be engaged in the home occupation. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
(3)  No display of products shall be visible from the street or premises, except bona fide agricultural products grown on the premises. 
(4)  Use of the building for the purpose of a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the square footage of one floor of the principal building. 
(5)  No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
(6)  The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood. Furthermore, except as would be caused by a typical residential use, no noise, vibration, dust, odor, smoke, glare, or electric disturbance that is perceptible beyond any property line will be permitted to occur as a result of the home occupation. 
(7)  No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(8)  Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. Not more than one car and one pickup truck or panel truck used in the business may be parked overnight; provided not more than one additional such vehicle may be parked at the premises during the day, and provided the gross vehicle weight of such vehicles does not exceed one ton; and provided that material kept on such vehicles is enclosed or kept in the bed of the vehicle, but not stored on racks. 
(9)  Pursuant to the above requirements, a home occupation includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Art studio; 
b.  Dressmaking; 
c.  Professional office of a lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant, salesman, real estate agent, insurance agent or other similar occupation; 
d.  Teaching individual musical instruments, dance or academic pupils, provided instruction is limited to not more than two pupils at a time; 
e.  The shop of a barber, beautician, or similar occupation, provided facilities are designed to accommodate only two persons at a time, and provided personal services are those which are provided on an appointment-only basis; 
f.  The care of less than six children for compensation. 
(10)  The occupation must operate under a home occupational license. 
(11)  The occupation must be subject to a fire service inspection. 
(12)  A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include any occupation or profession providing medical or mental services, including, but not limited to, physician, veterinarian, dentist, psychiatrist, or psychologist, nor shall it be interpreted to allow the preparation of food for sale on the premises. 
(b)  Prohibited. A customary home occupation specifically does not include the following: 
(1)  Dancing or band instrument instruction in groups. 
(2)  Florists or flower shops. 
(3)  Tearooms and restaurants. 
(4)  Tourist homes, boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
(5)  Fish hatcheries, worm farms or bait houses. 
(6)  The care of more than six children for compensation. 
(7)  Convalescent and nursing homes. 
(8)  Kennels and animal hospitals. 
(9)  Clinics and hospitals. 
(10)  Retail sales. 
(11)  Firewood sales. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-301—119-318. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 119-319. - Exceptions to side yard requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than required in the district in which it is located and said lot cannot be increased in width as provided herein, then the city manager or designee shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot; provided, however, that the side yard shall not be reduced to less than five feet. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-320. - Permitted encroachments of yard setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways that may be used for access for service or emergency vehicles. In case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard, not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-321. - Height limitations—General rule. 
Any structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the height limitations of the district in which it is located except as specified herein. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-322. - Same—Structures excluded. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flagpoles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, nor to observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, communication towers or antennas. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-323. - Visibility at intersections. 
On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery, or other obstruction to traffic line of sight vision shall exceed a height of 2½ feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines at two points, each 20 feet distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-324. - Yard fencing or walls. 
(a)  No fence or walls in excess of eight feet in height shall be installed. Fences in subdivisions shall be limited to chainlink type or other decorative type. No barbed wire or field fence or electric fences are allowed in a subdivision or in residentially zoned areas. 
(b)  No fence shall be placed any closer to the street than the front building line setback of any lot. In the case of corner lots, fences may be constructed in the yard along the street to the side of a building or dwelling but shall not encroach upon the yard on which the building or dwelling fronts. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-325. - Fences and hedges—Measurement rule. 
Heights of fences, hedges and other continuous foliage shall be measured from the top of the adjacent street curb, surface of an alley or the official established grade thereof, whichever is the higher. On inside lot lines the measurements shall be from the average grade of the lot line of the parcel or property having the lower elevation. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-326. - Same—Exception. 
The planning commission may approve, or may recommend as a condition for granting approval, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these regulations be placed as shielding between different uses, or between like uses upon agreement between the parties affected thereby, provided that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-327—119-376. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 119-377. - Spaces for off-street parking and loading and persons with disabilities required. 
(a)  Scope. It is the intent of this article that all buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces be so that they are in fact readily usable for such purposes. Off-street parking and loading requirements are waived in the CBD district. 
(b)  Additional spaces required. Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, a conforming amount of parking or loading spaces shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area or usability of existing parking or loading spaces unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
(c)  Parking for persons with handicaps. Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be required. Existing uses providing off-street parking shall have 12 months from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to comply with parking requirements for persons with disabilities. New uses providing off-street parking shall incorporate spaces for persons with disabilities into the design of parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-378. - Design standards. 
(a)  Off-street parks and driveways. The following are the design requirements for off-street parking spaces and driveways: 
(1)  Required dimensions and access for each parking space. Each automobile parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 19 feet in length. Driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
(2)  Interior driveways. Where 90-degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width. If 60-degree angle parking is used, then interior driveways shall be at least 13 feet in width for one-way traffic and 24 feet in width for two-way traffic. In the instance where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for one-way traffic and 24 feet in width for two-way traffic. A ten-foot stacking lane is required for drive-up windows or pick-up stations. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. 
a.  Drainage. All off-street parking spaces, access and interior driveways will be graded to insure proper drainage and surfaced with concrete or asphalt at least two inches thick installed on an approved base of five inches minimum and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
b.  Surface. Hardened surface may be approved only through special use approval. 
c.  Lighting. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect onto or cause glare in any adjacent residential district. 
(4)  Sharing or required off-street parking spaces. One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. This facility shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district. 
(5)  Spaces for persons with disabilities. Spaces for handicapped persons shall meet the requirements of the Georgia Accessibility Standards. 
(b)  Loading stalls. The following are the design requirements for off-street loading stalls: 
(1)  Required dimensions. Each loading stall shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 30 feet in length except that for wholesale and industrial use, loading stalls shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 50 feet in length. 
(2)  Access. All off-street loading stalls shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a public or private street. 
(3)  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street loading stalls and access shall be graded to insure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt at least two inches thick, installed on an approved base of five inches and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. If loading stalls are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spill onto adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-379. - Miscellaneous parking provisions. 
(a)  Limitations in residential districts. In any residential district, the parking of vehicles other than ordinary passenger automobiles, a pick-up or panel truck used to provide daily transportation to and from work, and any vehicle with a carrying capacity of more than 2,000 pounds, is prohibited in any residential district. 
(b)  Parking plans required. A parking plan for all but single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the city manager or designee with the construction plans. The city manager or designee shall review the proposed parking plan with the city engineer to insure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The city manager or designee shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until its related parking facilities are completed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(c)  Buffer strips. Parking spaces shall be separated from streets in public rights-of-way by curbs and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and planted in grass. 
(d)  Limitations on uses of parking lots. No parking lot areas may be used for the sale, repairs, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-380. - Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces and loading stalls required by type of permitted uses. For any use not listed the city manager or designee shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment follows the principles set forth. In making any such determination, the city manager or designee shall follow the principles set forth at the beginning of this article. All off-street parking shall be paved with curb and gutter. 

 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-381. - Curb cut requirements and design standards. 
Within any zoning district where the lowering or cutting away of any curbs for purposes of ingress and egress is required, such curb cut shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No more than one combined entrance and exit shall be allowed for any parcel of property, the frontage of which is less than 300 feet on any one street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted after showing the actual requirements of convenience and necessity and upon approval of the city manager or designee. 
(2)  No curb cut shall be located within 30 feet of any intersection. 
(3)  Maximum width of any curb cut including curb returns shall not exceed 30 feet except that a bona fide truck stop may not exceed the maximum figure as determined by the city manager or designee. 
(4)  Curb cuts shall be constructed so as to be at least five feet from any property line. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-382—119-407. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BUFFER AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 119-408. - Screening requirements for certain operations. 
Certain uses such as junk or salvage yard operations and other commercial and industrial operations requiring the storage of inoperative equipment, vehicles and other types of bulk storage for prolonged periods of time could present unsightly views of health hazards. To preclude this from occurring, the city manager or designee shall require owners of such properties to completely enclose such operations by a fence which completely obscures views of the property from adjacent sidewalks, streets, and other properties and is built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle and types of bulk storage stored on the property; however, the minimum height of any fence shall be eight feet. Such fences shall be constructed of masonry or wood or combination thereof or other materials approved by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-409—119-429. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUFFERS 

Sec. 119-430. - Buffer requirements. 
It is recognized that the location of commercial or industrial land uses directly adjacent to single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential uses can create an incompatible situation. Additionally, the location of two-family or multiple-family residential land uses or manufactured home parks directly adjacent to single-family residential land uses can be an incompatible situation. Accordingly, in commercial and industrial districts, when a principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a single-family residential district. The city council may require a similar buffer strip between other districts and land uses deemed to be incompatible. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-431. - General requirements. 
(a)  A planted buffer strip is required to protect residential land uses from excessive heat, dust, wind, light, spill, unsightly views, odor and other characteristics commonly associated with commercial and industrial land uses and related vehicular and pedestrian traffic which can adversely impact the quality of residential life. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual and acoustical privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in a pleasing environment, and shall provide for the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. The density of buffers should take precedence over width of buffer. 
(b)  Required buffers shall be established and maintained by the developer and owner of the incompatible (less restrictive) land use. The required buffer must: 
(1)  Be depicted in detail (i.e., the type and locations of natural and planted vegetation are to be illustrated) on each site plan prior to approval. 
(2)  Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention of the city manager or designee and formal approval secured prior to initiating activity within a required buffer area. 
(3)  Utilize existing vegetation where it has been determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or, when required, be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
(4)  Retain the natural topography of the land, except when a portion must be cleared and graded as required by the local law to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation. 
(5)  Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(6)  Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading, other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by the local law or for a structure other than a fence. 
(7)  Attain a height of not less than six feet within three years of the planting date. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-432. - Minimum buffer specifications. 
(a)  Buffered strip areas shall be established to meet each of the following minimum width requirements for each of the following districts where adjacent to a residential district: 

 
(b)  This buffer screening shall be required along rear and side yard lot lines and shall not extend closer to the street than the front building line. Buffer screening shall be of such density that the growth shall screen activity from the normal view level of the first story in a reasonable amount of time and attain a height of not less than six feet within three years of the planting date. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-433. - Composition of buffer. 
In those instances where it is clearly obvious that existing natural vegetation and topography could not possibly achieve the desired level of screening as determined by this chapter, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen of planting date. 
(1)  The following are approved for use as part of the screening buffer: 
a.  Trees: 
Loblolly Pine 
White Pine 
Yaupon Holly 
American Holly 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Laurel Cherry 
Arizona Cypress Redbay 
Virginia Pine 
b.  Shrubs: 
Cleyera 
Euonymus 
Japanese Privet 
California Privet 
European Privet 
Southern Waxmyrtle 
Northern Bayberry 
Pittosporum 
Japan Yew 
c.  Groundcover: 
Short Juniper 
Periwinkle 
Lippie 
Evergreen Candytuft 
Elysum 
(2)  Other evergreen plant materials having the same growth characteristics as the aforementioned may be substituted, subject to approval by the city manager or designee prior to installation. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-434. - Maintenance. 
The screening buffer planting and any required landscaped open space planting shall be guaranteed for the life of the commercial, industrial or residential development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed by the installing property owner to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer actually serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-435—119-451. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 119-452. - Generally. 
(a)  Minimum standards. The landscaping requirements in this division are the minimum design standards for all development regulated under the provisions of this article. These requirements shall be used by the city manager or designee in reviewing site plans, and may be supplemented by specific landscaping standards and specifications as established by the city planning commission and approved by the council. 
(b)  Plans to be evaluated. Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design concept for any project; therefore, the city manager or designee shall evaluate landscaping schemes as to their relationship to the existing natural landscape, developed and other proposed landscape, including on adjacent properties and public right-of-way, and the building or buildings existing and/or proposed. 
(c)  Preservation of existing trees. Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or replaced with suitable vegetation. 
(d)  Screens. Landscaping shall be used whenever possible to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, etc. 
(e)  Sod required. All front green spaces shall be sodded. If grass seed must be used in the rear, it shall be of a variety suitable to the area that produces complete coverage. 
(f)  Artificial vegetation prohibited. No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed. 
(g)  Tree preservation. All existing, healthy deciduous and hardwood trees with a caliper of ten or more inches at a point three feet above grade shall be retained, whenever feasible. If not feasible, the tree shall be replaced with the same or similar type of tree in accordance with this article, unless otherwise approved by the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-453. - Coverage. 
(a)  The minimum total lot area in landscaped open space shall be the sum of the areas required to meet perimeter, frontage, interior parking lot and buffer strip landscaping requirements. 
(b)  Existing on-site plant materials may be credited as landscaped open space for meeting the requirements of this section if in the opinion of the city manager or designee such plant materials achieve the purposes of this section; however, no more than 25 percent of any lot area in water or floodplain shall be credited as landscaped open space without planning commission approval. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-454. - Frontage and perimeter landscaping requirements. 
The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all districts and uses regulated by this article, except for the CBD district: 
(1)  A landscaping strip of at least ten feet in width shall be required along all public rights-of-way, except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
(2)  A landscaping strip of at least five feet in width shall be required along any side lot that abuts adjoining property that is not a public right-of-way, except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
The requirements of this section shall be included within the buffer strip where a buffer strip is required. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-455. - Interior landscaping. 
The following requirements shall apply for parking lots designed for 20 or more parking spaces: 
(1)  Not less than two percent of the interior of a parking lot shall be landscaped. 
(2)  The required landscape area need not be contiguous, but there shall be at least one tree in each separate area; and each separate area shall have an area of at least 50 square feet with a minimum width or diameter of five feet. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-456. - Tree requirements. 
(a)  A minimum of one tree shall be required for each 500 square feet of the total minimum required open space. For purposes of meeting this requirement, all existing trees of at least 20 feet in height shall be counted. Trees required for screening purposed shall not be included in the calculation. 
(b)  Trees shall be planted and/or retained in areas of the site to enhance the overall project design and provide such amenities as visual attractiveness, natural resources preservation, energy conservation, etc. 
(c)  All retained or planted trees shall be protected or situated as to prevent damage from environmental changes resulting from any building or other improvements. 
(d)  Trees shall not be less than six feet tall. 
(e)  The planning commission may vary the minimum landscaping and tree requirements of this section, if specific circumstances and/or site conditions warrant such action. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-457. - Maintenance. 
The owner, occupant, tenant and respective agent of each property shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Sec. 119-458. - Recommended species list. 
(a)  Approved species. Plant materials for over-story, under-story, parking lot and street tree applications may be selected from the recommended species list maintained by the city manager or designee. Other species may be used upon approval of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  Nonapproved species. The following species are not approved for use in required landscaping: 
(1)  Bradford Pear ( Pyrus calleryana "Bradford"). 
(2)  Eastern White Pine ( Pinus strobes ). 
(3)  Siberian Elm ( Ulmus pumila ). 
(4)  Silver Maple ( Acer saccharinum ). 
(c)  Nonrecommended species. The following species are not recommended for use in required landscaping: 
(1)  Catalpa ( Catalpa speciosa ). 
(2)  Norway Maple ( Acer platanoides ). 
(3)  Princess Tree ( Paulownia tomentosa ). 
(4)  Tree-of-Heaven ( Ailanthus altissima ). 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-459—119-484. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Sec. 119-485. - Chapter not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the ordinance adopted on December 12, 1996, relating to communication towers and antennas. Such ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014(2)) 
Secs. 119-486—119-510. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1994 Code as supplemented through January 1, 1994 that are included 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances not included in the 1994 Code that are included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 