Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainment, ch. 10; taxation, ch. 78; hotel-motel excise tax, § 78-71 et seq. State Law reference— Local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 22-1. - Use of property. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of property in the downtown commercial district of the city to allow any person other than the property owner or the owner of the business establishment located on the property to offer goods or merchandise for sale in the outdoor areas of such property without obtaining a permit from the city for such activity. (b)  Any property owner or business owner within the downtown commercial district may obtain the requisite permit from the city by paying a permit fee of $5.00. No more than two such permits shall be granted to any property owner or business owner in any calendar year. (c)  The adoption of this section shall not confer any right to any property owner or business owner and any application for permit may be denied by the city if in the sole judgment of the city the display of the merchandise is an impediment to the free flow of traffic, is unsightly or offensive, or in any way threatens the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. (d)  This section shall not prohibit the sale of goods and merchandise during festivals and other public events that are approved and sanctioned by the city council by resolution. (Ord. No. 07-06, § 1—4, 3-22-2007) Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-06, §§ 1—4, adopted March 22, 2007 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 22-1 was at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparatvie Table. 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 78. State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-31. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city.     For the year 2004 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Ashburn, whether with a location in the City or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; evidence of the payment of which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, a business tax registration showing the location of a permanent office in another location in the State of Georgia shall be shown to the city clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city upon request. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning:     City means the City of Ashburn, Georgia.     [ Employee means:] (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (2) of this paragraph, "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of an employer who withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. (2)  An individual who performs work under the direction or supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner that issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2.     Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or vehicle or used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site.     Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business in the City of Ashburn.     Practitioners of professions and occupations does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-33. - Regulatory fees. (a)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. (b)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in the following occupations and professions will be provided in periodic resolutions passed by the City Council: (1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers; (2)  Carnivals; (3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; (4)  Tattoo artists; (5)  Stables; (6)  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; (7)  Scrap metal processors; (8)  Pawnbrokers; (9)  Food service establishments; (10)  Dealers in precious metals; (11)  Firearms dealers; (12)  Peddlers; (13)  Parking lots; (14)  Nursing and person care homes; (15)  Newspaper vending boxes; (16)  Modeling agencies; (17)  Massage parlors; (18)  Landfills; (19)  Auto and motorcycle racing; (20)  Boarding houses; (21)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; (22)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; (23)  Hotels and motels; (24)  Hypnotists; (25)  Handwriting analysts; (26)  Health clubs, gyms, and spas; (27)  Fortunetellers; (28)  Garbage collectors; (29)  Escort services; (30)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; (31)  Locksmiths; (32)  Teen/adult social club[s]. A teen/adult social club shall mean any business allowing the congregation of patrons for the purpose of viewing entertainment, dancing, social interaction or other related activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., not to include religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county, or city institutions, fraternal orders, or bona fide clubs. A teen/adult social club shall not include those businesses with an alcohol license granted under chapter 6 of the Official Code of the City of Ashburn; and (33)  Junkyards, scrap yards or auto graveyards. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, 3-4-2004; Ord. No. 09-05, §§ 2, 3, 8-6-2009; Res. No. 09-08, § 1, 8-6-2009; Ord. No. 11-02, § 1, 2-3-2011) Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-03, § 1, adopted March 3, 2004, amended the title of section 22-33 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said section title pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 22-34. - Occupation tax levied; computation of full-time employees; occupation tax schedule; limitations. (a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations if the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city; or (2)  Is an out-of-state business or practitioner with no location or office in the city but: a.  Has employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients within the corporate limits of the city; or b.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and is located within the corporate limits of the city. (b)  The occupation tax is levied based on the number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. (c)  The occupation tax is levied in accordance with the following schedule: No. of Employees Amount of Tax 1—5 $75.00 6—9 $100.00 10 or more $175.00  (d)  Insurance companies, not agents, will pay an annual license fee of $40.00 in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8(b)(1). (e)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. (f)  A business or practitioner that is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article by reason thereof shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. (1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. (2)  Subject to the exception provided by the preceding subsection (1), a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of as to the applicability of this subsection. (3)  A business or practitioner that has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). (4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. (g)  Businesses commencing on or after January 1 of any year but prior to July 1 of that year shall pay the tax for the entire year. If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. (h)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this ordinance only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. (i)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in subsection (a) above, any individual or entity which owns and leases residential property shall be exempt from the levy of the occupation tax set forth herein if: 1) the total number of residential dwelling units owned, managed, or serviced by such individual or entity is three or fewer; and 2) if such individual or entity is not otherwise subject to the occupation tax levy set out herein. Any individual claiming the exemption set out in this paragraph shall submit documentation to the city verifying the number of residential dwelling units owned or managed. This subsection (i) shall not be construed or applied in violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17, which generally prohibits levying or collecting a fixed amount occupation tax upon real estate brokers unless such brokers do not maintain a principal or branch office within the city limits. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003; Ord. No. 15-01, § 1, 2-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-35. - Practitioners of professions and occupations.     Practitioners of professions and occupations enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 12-19 above or shall pay an occupation tax of $175.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for the year 2004 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect either method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-36. - Exemptions. (a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: (1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; (2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; (3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; (4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; (5)  Non-profit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; (6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; (7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; (8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city. (9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or (10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the Sate of Georgia or the United States. (b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes, or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-37. - Evidence of state registration when required.     Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-38. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. (a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. (b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-39. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. (a)  On or before March 1 of each year, an individual, business, or practitioner subject to this occupation tax article shall file with the city manager, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. (b)  Individuals, businesses, and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city manager or make available to the city such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-40. - Date due; penalty and interest. (a)  Any occupation tax due pursuant to this ordinance shall be due and payable annually within 30 days of January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity, as enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b), in the city after January 1 in any year, the occupation tax shall not be due until January 1 of the following year. (b)  Any individual, business, or practitioner subject to any occupation tax imposed by this ordinance which is unpaid on March 1 shall be subject to a penalty of 10 percent of the tax or fee due and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-41. - Enforcement; violations. (a)  It is the duty of the city manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article, and to summon violators of this article to appear in municipal court. The city manager may issue executions against individuals, businesses, and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing, any penalty imposed by section 22-40(b), and any interest imposed by section 22-40(b). (b)  The city manager shall issue executions against individuals, businesses, and practitioners for taxes or fees which are due and owing, penalties, or interest. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business, or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest, and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of the State of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the State of Georgia in regard to tax executions. (c)  Individuals, businesses, and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to civil fine, to be imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction over the enforcement of city ordinances, not more than $500.00, that may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. (d)  Individuals, businesses, and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or for levying or collecting such occupation tax shall be subject to a criminal fine of not more than $500.00. (e)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business, or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses, or practitioners who fail to obtain the required certificate or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-42. - Public hearings. (a)  After January 1, 2004, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 22-34(c). (b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one public hearing as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-43. - Prior ordinance.     To the extent that any occupation taxes are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes until such time as they are paid in full. (Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 3-6-2003) 
Sec. 22-44. - [Teen/adult social club security.]     Any person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the City of Ashburn paying an occupation tax pursuant to section 22-31 of the Official Code of the City of Ashburn for said business, trade, profession or occupation, such business allowing the congregation of 25 people or more, shall provide security during operating hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Security personnel shall be POST-certified law enforcement officers in good standing. The establishment shall provide a minimum of one officer for the first 25 to 100 patrons at any one time. The establishment shall provide an additional officer for any portion exceeding 100 patrons thereafter. Notwithstanding that the security personnel shall be compensated by the licensee, officers shall file a written report of any violation on the licensed premises either by a patron, an employee of the establishment, or the payer of the business and occupation tax and the officer shall take action necessary to enforce any local, state or federal law or ordinance. (Ord. No. 09-05, § 1, 8-6-2009) 
Secs. 22-45—22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS 
Sec. 22-51. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Pawnbroker shall mean any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph.     Pledged goods shall mean tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his or her business. 
Sec. 22-52. - Requirements generally. (a)  License required. Each pawnbroker doing business within the city shall be required to obtain a business license from the city clerk. No license shall be granted to any person to engage in the business of a pawnbroker until the applicant shall have paid the license fee prescribed and obtained approval of such application from the city council. The application for a license under the provisions of this article shall state the location of the place of business and the names of the owners or parties interested, directly or indirectly, and if a corporation, the names of all the officers and stockholders shall be stated. (b)  Limitation on issuance. No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or burglary or robbery. No pawnbroker shall employ anyone who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or burglary or robbery. (c)  Review of application. No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the city council until the police chief has reviewed such application and forwarded recommendations thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this section. The police chief shall conduct a criminal background check on the applicant and each employee engaged in the business of a pawnbroker. 
Sec. 22-53. - Daily reports.     Each person engaging in business as a pawnbroker shall file daily written reports at 10:00 a.m. with the police chief showing the name and description of the persons who pawned or sold articles the preceding 24 hours and a detailed description of each article pawned or sold. It is hereby made the duty of the police chief to obtain such report promptly each day. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to fail or refuse to make such daily report in the manner prescribed by this section, and the license and permit of any such offender shall stand immediately forfeited. 
Sec. 22-54. - Permanent records—Required, content.     Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record book in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each loan, purchase, or sale: (1)  The date of the transaction; (2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction; (3)  The name, age, and address of the customer; a description of the general appearance of the customer; and the distinctive number from the customer's driver's license or other similar identification card; (4)  An identification and description of the pledged or purchased goods, including, if reasonably available, the serial, model, or other number and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; (5)  The number of the receipt or pawn ticket; (6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; (7)  If payment is made by check, the number of the check issued from the purchase price or loan; (8)  The maturity date of the transaction; (9)  The signature of the customer. 
Sec. 22-55. - Same—Manner of recording entry; corrections; inspection.     Entries in records required in section 22-54 hereof shall appear in ink and shall be in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections may be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The record book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer (under the supervision and cognizance of the police chief) during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
Sec. 22-56. - Same—Maintained for four years.     The record of each pawn or purchase transaction provided for in section 22-54 hereof shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years. 
Sec. 22-57. - Weapons.     No pawnbroker shall display in his/her window any revolver, rifle, shotgun, or other firearm or display any firearm in any manner visible from the street or sidewalk. 
Sec. 22-58. - Minors.     No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist in his or her business. 
Sec. 22-59. - Stolen goods.     It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him or her, or which is sought to be pledged, if he or she should have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it. 
Secs. 22-60—22-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANIES 
Sec. 22-65. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. (a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. (b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. (Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 12-4-2008) 
Sec. 22-66. - Authorized designee.     The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: (1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. (2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. (3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. (4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. (5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonable related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. (6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights of way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. (Ord. No. 08-16, § 1, 12-4-2008) 
Secs. 22-67—22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINE ORDINANCE 
Sec. 22-70. - Applicability. (a)  The rules set forth in this article shall govern the operation of all establishments offering the use and playing of one or more coin-operated amusement machines to the public in the City of Ashburn, Georgia. (b)  The term "coin-operated amusement machine" as used herein shall have the same meaning and definition as the term "bona-fide coin-operated amusement machine" contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2. (c)  As used in this article, the term "establishment" shall mean any establishment of business, any portion of whose revenue is from coin-operated amusement machines as defined in this article. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-71. - Registration of establishments.     All establishments shall be registered with the Chief of Police of the City of Ashburn, which registration shall include the names and addresses of all persons having a financial interest in the operation of the establishment, and all persons in charge thereof, and such other relevant information as the chief of police shall reasonably require.     At the time of registration the applicant or applicants shall exhibit to the chief of police all licenses and permits required by O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. No establishment shall be permitted to operate in the city unless it and all of its machines are licensed and permitted in compliance with the provisions of that section. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-72. - Investigation of applicant. (a)  The person or persons owing any interest in and/or operating an establishment shall be investigated by the Ashburn Police Department and a report made to the city clerk. This requirement shall be waived if a current investigation report is on file. "Current" is defined as being within the past six months. (b)  The police reports shall be sent to the city clerk to be placed in the applicant's file. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-73. - Facilities.     All rooms containing one or more coin-operated amusement machines shall be open to view and accessible to the public, and no such machines shall be placed in a private room or any portion of the business closed off to the public or to the rest of the building by doors or partitions of any kind. Windows shall not be blackened or covered with closed blinds, curtains or anything which interferes with visibility through the window. The operation of all coin- operated amusement machines shall be subject to electronic visual surveillance at all times. Videotapes, DVDs or any other recording shall be maintained by the establishment for a period of not less than 30 days.     The building or structure in which the establishment is operated shall comply at all times with all building, electrical, plumbing and other codes of the City of Ashburn pertaining to buildings and structures or otherwise regulating quality of construction and maintenance of buildings and structures in the City of Ashburn. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-74. - Serving food.     If food is served, the applicant shall have a valid health certificate issued by the Turner County Health Department before any license to serve food can be issued. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-75. - Violations and punishment.     Commission of any of the following acts by an owner, agent, or employee of an establishment, and/or the violation of any other provision or requirement of this article, and/or the failure to comply with any requirement herein, shall constitute "a violation of this Code" as that term is defined and used in section 1-8 of the Code of the City of Ashburn, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8, and all of the provisions of section 1-8 are applicable to this article. Each separate day such violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as provided above. (1)  Engaging in, or permitting or allowing on the premises, sales, in violation of state or federal law, of "controlled substances," as that term is defined by state and/or federal law. The terms "permitting" and "allowing" as used herein include sales where the owner or operator in charge knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place, and failed to take effective action to stop them. (2)  Permitting persons to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or who in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to them, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances as heretofore defined. (3)  Permitting any gambling or betting in the place of business or on the premises. (4)  Permitting or committing any violation of state law or city ordinance. (5)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to play coin-operated amusement machines an establishment during times when alcoholic beverages are sold, furnished or dispensed therein for consumption on the premises. This subsection shall not apply to persons under 18 years of age who are accompanied by a parent or guardian. Any person desiring admission thereto during hours and times when alcoholic beverages are sold, furnished, or dispensed for consumption on the premises who is or appears to be under 18 years of age, shall produce satisfactory identification and age verification or certify his or her age in writing or produce a written permit before he or she shall be allowed entry. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-76. - Gambling devices prohibited.     No form of gambling shall be allowed in any establishment. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold therein. The use of baseball tickers and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-77. - Further restrictions.     It shall be unlawful for any establishment to maintain connections with any place where gambling or illegal activity is conducted or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or other dealing in of alcoholic beverages for any immoral purpose. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-78. - Enforcement.     It shall be the duty of the police or other constituted authorities to inspect all establishments in the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this article are being observed; and it shall be the duty of such officer to report all violations promptly to the city attorney and furnish the city attorney such information and assistance as is necessary for the prosecution of such violations. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 22-79. - Exemption.     This article shall not apply to establishments operated by private industrial concerns solely for the convenience of its employees, Young Men's Christian Associations; religious orders; charitable institutions; state, county, or city institutions; fraternal orders; or bona fide clubs operating such establishments for members or employees only. (Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
ARTICLE VI. - LICENSE FOR TEMPORARY SALES OF FIREWORKS 
Sec. 22-80. - Definitions.     [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]     Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles.     Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks.     Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance.     Pyrotechnics means fireworks.     Proper identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person or such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or other identification card authorized by the State of Georgia.     Temporary shall be a period of time not exceeding two months in a calendar year and not exceeding 30 days in a row in any one period. (Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1(Exh. A), 11-5-2015) 
Sec. 22-81. - License required.     Any business selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand must apply for a license from the City of Ashburn. The license fee for a retail fireworks temporary stand license shall be $500.00 per each stand within the city. (1)  Requirements for license . a.  An applicant for a fireworks retail license from the City of Ashburn shall offer proof that the applicant maintains public liability and product liability insurance with minimum coverage limits of $2,000,000.00 to cover any loses, damages or injuries that might ensue to persons and property as a result of the sale of consumer fireworks. b.  The applicant must demonstrate that they have obtained a license from the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. The license fee for a retail fireworks license shall be $500.00 per location within the city. c.  A license will only be granted to applicants who agree to operate their stand in accordance with the National Fire Protection Act Provision 1124. (2)  Locations . A stand shall only be permitted to be located within one thousand feet of either a fire hydrant or a fire department connection belonging to the City of Ashburn unless the Fire Chief of the City of Ashburn provides in writing that the stand may operate further than one thousand feet from a fire hydrant or other fire department connection. (3)  Number of stands permitted . a.  When a distributor is a retail chain license by the safety fire commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(d), the retailer may operate two temporary consumer firework stands for every retail chain store located in the county. b.  If at the time of the application for a stand, no distributors licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(b) or O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(d) are doing business in Turner County, any distributor licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(b) or O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(d) that maintains a retail sales facility within 75 miles of the border of Turner County, may choose to place one of their two retail stands in Turner County. c.  A fireworks distributor who is not a retailer may operate two retail stands for each license obtained from the safety fire commissioner. d.  Any licensee shall notify the city clerk and the fire chief of the location of the temporary retail stand no later than ten days prior to the opening of the stand so that the fire chief can inspect the hydrant or fire connection located near or closest to the location of the stand in ensure its proper functioning. (4)  The sale of fireworks may only be conducted through in person face to face sales. Any licensee selling fireworks within the City of Ashburn shall ensure that all customers purchasing fireworks from this stand show proper identification verifying that they are over the age of 18. (Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1(Exh. A), 11-5-2015) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Fees for operation of the city's cemeteries are as determined from time to time by the city council. Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.; Georgia Cemetery Act of 1983, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 
Sec. 26-1. - Enforcement generally.     The city is empowered to enforce this article establishing the rules and regulations for all city cemeteries and to exclude from any cemetery any person violating this article. The city shall have charge of the grounds and buildings, including the conduct of funerals, traffic, employees, plot owners and visitors, and at all times shall have supervision and control of all persons in the cemetery. (Code 1983, § 6-16) 
Sec. 26-2. - General rules and regulations. (a)  All persons within the cemetery should avoid conduct unbecoming a sacred place. It is of the utmost importance that there should be strict observance of the properties in the cemetery. (b)  Approaching the bereaved for the purpose of soliciting any business within the cemetery is recognized as not in good taste and therefore shall not be permitted. (c)  Placing of signs or notices or advertisements of any kind within the cemetery is prohibited. (d)  Bringing firearms into the cemetery except by a military escort accompanying a veteran's funeral or attending memorial services is prohibited. (Code 1983, § 6-17) 
Sec. 26-3. - Plants and shrubs. (a)  The city will undertake to maintain, as may be practicable, the planting of trees and shrubs, to preserve and maintain landscape features, but does not undertake to maintain individual plantings or urns or plants. (b)  There shall be no individual beds or shrubbery or flowers allowed on any lot in the cemetery. (c)  The city shall have the authority to remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind from the cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the city, they become unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when they do not conform to the standard maintained. (d)  The city reserves the right to prevent the removal of any flowers, floral designs, trees, shrubs, plants or herbage of any kind unless the city gives consent. (Code 1983, § 6-18) 
Sec. 26-4. - Interments and disinterments. (a)  Properties shall not allow interments to be made in their lots for a remuneration, nor shall any transfer or assignment of any lot or of any interest in a lot be valid without the consent in writing of the city. (b)  No disinterments shall be allowed except by consent of the city, and upon the written order of the owners of the lot. (c)  In order to maintain a high standard of care, a grave vault made of a permanent type material such as natural stone, metal, concrete or fiberglass shall be placed in a grave so that the top of the vault will not be less than 12 inches below ground level at any point so as to eliminate unsightly and/or dead spots in grass sod. When any other type of outer receptacle is used for burial, other than those mentioned in this subsection, the top of the receptacle shall be at least 24 inches below ground level at any given point. (d)  No lot shall be used for any other purpose than for the burial of the human dead. (Code 1983, § 6-19) 
Sec. 26-5. - Specifications for memorial work.     In order to maintain a sound operation of the cemetery and to promote optimum care and maintenance of the cemetery, the following specifications shall apply: (1)  Family monuments. a.  Only one central or family memorial shall be placed on a family plot. b.  The memorial shall be set at the rear of the plot, at least three inches from the rear line, and no closer than six inches from the side lines of the lot. The rear line shall be that lot line furthest from the road, drive or walk. c.  All family memorials shall be of first-quantity granite, marble or other natural stone. (2)  Individual memorials or monuments. a.  Individual grave markers such as pillows, grass or slant face markers shall be placed at the end of graves farthest from base of monuments or family memorials. b.  Where family memorials are not used, all markers shall be placed at the head of the grave. c.  Where tablets, such as the colonial headstone type, are used at each grave instead of a family monument, they shall not exceed two feet in width, six inches in thickness and three feet and eight inches in height. Thickness should not be less than four inches. d.  Slabs of granite or marble or other natural stone shall be permitted. Concrete slabs shall not be permitted. e.  Every individual grave shall have a marker in conformity with the requirements provided in section 26-5. (3)  Prohibited material. Memorials of any other kind, even for temporary use of composition, or wood shall not be permitted. (4)  Mausoleums. a.  Mausoleums or tombs either wholly or partially above ground shall be constructed only of first-grade natural stone and shall be no closer than ten inches to any lot line. b.  Blueprints for construction and placements of construction and placements of mausoleums or tombs shall be submitted to the city authorities for approval. (5)  Corner posts. a.  Lot corner marker posts, whenever used, shall be placed level with grade of land. b.  Initials, whenever used, shall be incised (cut in), not raised. c.  Posts shall be not more than six inches by six inches or less than six inches by six inches in size. d.  Each post shall be set in concrete or like material. (6)  Steps or entrance plates. a.  All steps or entrance plates erected upon lots must be placed level with grade of land. b.  All steps or entrance plates in the West View Memorial Garden Cemetery shall be set on the front lot lines, those being the lines closest to the roads running north and south in the cemetery. (7)  Lot enclosures. a.  All lot enclosures of any kind whatever are prohibited. b.  No lot surface shall be covered with concrete and/or gravel of any kind. (8)  Foundations. a.  Foundations shall be required for all memorials and/or markers. b.  Foundations are to be the full size of the base of memorial or marker and finished one inch below grade at top. c.  If any fault results from improper installation of foundation, it shall be the responsibility of the lot owner and/or monument company to rectify the condition. (Code 1983, § 6-20; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 3-3-2011) 
Sec. 26-6. - License.     For the protection of all lot owners, monument companies or their agents who erect, clean or repair memorials in the cemetery, they shall obtain a city business license, and in doing such work shall comply with the reasonable directions of the city. (Code 1983, § 6-21) 
Sec. 26-7. - Monument builders and outside workmen. (a)  Monument builders and erectors shall set monuments and markers in conformity with cemetery requirements and in accordance with the trade standards of proper methods of handling and setting. (b)  All workmen employed by outside firms while within the cemetery are subject to reasonable regulations of the cemetery. (Code 1983, § 6-22) 
Sec. 26-8. - Right to remove. (a)  Should any monument, mausoleum, tomb or memorial become unsightly, dilapidated, or a menace to visitors, the city shall have the right at the expense of the lot owner either to correct the condition or to remove the monument, mausoleum, tomb or memorial. (b)  If any inscription is placed in or upon any monument, mausoleum, tomb or memorial, or upon anything which shall be determined by the city authorities to be offensive or improper, they shall have the right to enter upon such lot and remove the offensive or improper object. (Code 1983, § 6-23) 
Sec. 26-9. - [Schedule of fees for the purchase of cemetary lots.]     The mayor and council shall adopt a schedule of fees as amended from time to time for the purchase of cemetery lots. (Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 3-3-2011) 
Sec. 26-10. - [Cemetery lot fee.]     The fee for a cemetery lot in the City of Ashburn cemetery shall be $125.00. (Res. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-3-2011) Editor's note— Section 1 of Res. No. 2011-03, adopted March 3, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 26-10 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 58. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 6, 2012, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 30-31—30-37, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the original codification and Res. No. 08-03, adopted March 20, 2008. Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); the War on Terrorism Local Assistance Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-75-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-31. - Definition of emergency management.     As used herein, the term "emergency management" shall have the meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, as amended. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-32. - Regulations continued in effect.     All ordinances, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, motions, and orders are on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-33. - Office of the city emergency management director.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27, there is established the city emergency management office. The city council shall nominate for appointment by the Director of Emergency Management for the State of Georgia, a director of emergency management for the city. The emergency management director must meet all the qualification and other requirements of applicable law, including those set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. The emergency management director shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with: (1)  Representing the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. (2)  Assisting city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. (3)  Developing in conjunction with other city departments the plan for emergency functions/emergency operations plan. Such plan will be in consonant with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the city council for approval and thence to the state director for approval. (4)  Maintaining the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management and disaster program, including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management office. (5)  Rendering reports such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. (6)  Procuring, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. (7)  Coordinating, during periods of a declared emergency and under the supervision of governing officials, the activities of the city emergency operating center staff. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-34. - Emergency management and response powers. (a)  Declaration of local emergency. (1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. (2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. (3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city governing authority may, by ordinance, end a state of local emergency at any time. (4)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 1.  The emergency management director and his or her designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the applicable local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 2.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the emergency management director or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 3.  The emergency management director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city governing authority. 4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate: section 30-37 regarding registration of building and repair services; section 30-38 regarding closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergencies; section 30-39 regarding prohibiting overcharging. If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 30-36 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. d.  Additional emergency powers. The emergency management director shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 3.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters. 4.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 5.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 6.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 7.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 8.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 9.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. (b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "declaration of local emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY     WHEREAS, the City of Ashburn, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and     WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and     WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event;     NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law;     IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated.     WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: (1)  That the applicable local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; (2)  That the following sections of the City Code of Ordinances be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 30-37, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 30-38, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews; Section 30-39; Overcharging Prohibited]; and (3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 30-34(a)(4)(c), (d) or such other measures as appropriate.] SO ORDERED , this ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 2012 at [TIME]. _____Mayor"  (c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the applicable local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-35. - Enforcement and remedies. (a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the emergency management director or local governing authority during a declared emergency. (b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the emergency management director or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. (c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the emergency management director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. (d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this article may be enforced by the city police department. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-36. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. (a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. (b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-Verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. (c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. (d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. (e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. (f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-37. - Registration of building and repair services. (a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. (b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. (c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: (1)  Name of applicant; (2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; (3)  Applicant's Social Security number or Federal Employer Identification number; (4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; (5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; (6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; (7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; (8)  Georgia business license number, if required. (9)  Copy of license from Secretary of State, if required. (10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. (11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. (d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city governing authority, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-38. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. (a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. (b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the applicable local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. (c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: (1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; (2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; (3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; (4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; (5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; (6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; (7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); (8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; (9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; (10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the emergency management director. (d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. (e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-39. - Overcharging prohibited. (a)  [Generally.] To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. (b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency.     Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months alter the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city governing authority. (c)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency as set out in this chapter, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the governing authority of the city, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 30-40. - Volunteers.     All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. (Ord. No. 12-06, § 1(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 30-41—30-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - COURTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 58; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. State Law reference— Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts and magistrate courts to abate nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; agreements between private entities and municipal court judges for probation services, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 34-1. - Sessions.     A regular session of the municipal court shall be held each month in sufficient frequency to meet the needs of the city. Each session shall be held at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined by the municipal court judge, provided any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
Sec. 34-2. - Duty of police officers—Persons violating city ordinances.     Any police officer of the city shall arrest and confine in the county jail, when necessary, any offender against ordinances of the city, where such arrest and confinement is necessary to secure such offender's appearance before the municipal court to answer for an offense, or where it is necessary to preserve the peace and good order of the city, or such police officer may take bond as otherwise provided in section 19-50 of this chapter. 
Sec. 34-3. - Same—Persons violating certain state laws.     Any person who shall, in the presence of any police officer, violate any penal laws of this state not punishable by city ordinances shall be arrested with or without a warrant and be carried before a committing magistrate for examination and prosecution. 
Sec. 34-4. - Docket.     It shall be the duty of the clerk of court to keep a docket showing the disposition of all cases brought before the municipal court. At the trial of all cases, the city clerk shall record opposite the statement of the case the punishment inflicted and the date, and an entry shall be made under the sentence of the judge of the municipal court showing the final disposition of the case, that is whether the fine, if any, was collected, the date of such collection, and the disposition of such amounts. 
Sec. 34-5. - Warrant or summons; issuance.     It shall be the duty of any member of the police department, in all cases where a complaint is made or information obtained of any violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city, to issue an accusation/summons in the name of the city and directed to the accused, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court to answer such charge, which accusation/summons shall designate the time and place of trial. It shall be signed by the officer issuing the accusation/summons, and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at his place of residence by the issuing officer. 
Sec. 34-6. - Service of summons generally.     Summons directed to any offender shall be served personally by some member of the police force. 
Sec. 34-7. - Procedure for service of process on corporations. (a)  In addition to any other means provided by law, corporations may be served in accordance with the provisions of this section. (b)  Whenever any charge shall be preferred against a corporation doing business in the city for violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the city clerk shall issue an original and copy notice to the defendant corporation of the charge against such corporation, specifying the time when such charge shall be heard by the municipal court of the city, which copy notice shall be served by the chief of police or any police officer of the city, or the sheriff of the county, at least ten days before the time fixed for trial in the municipal court upon any officer or such corporation to be found in the city, or upon any agent of such corporation, or employee in charge of the business of such corporation, in the city. The officer serving such copy notice shall make an entry of such service on the original notice and return the notice to the municipal court of the city. Such service shall be served upon the corporation, and such case shall, upon the return of such notice as provided in this section, stand for trial before the municipal court at the time stated in such notice. 
Sec. 34-8. - Issuance of subpoenas.     Whenever the attendance of any witness may be required before the municipal court to establish any act, the city clerk shall issue a subpoena or summons directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, which shall be served as other process by the chief of police, or other officer or police officer. 
Sec. 34-9. - Contempt for failure to appear. (a)  If a defendant fails to appear before the municipal court at the designated date and time, the judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to charge the defendant with contempt of court, which offense shall carry a fine not to exceed $200.00, and to issue a bench warrant for the arrest and confinement of such defendant. The period of confinement shall continue until such time as the defendant posts bond and pays the fine(s) outstanding on the pending charge(s) or until the defendant's case can be heard by the court. (b)  If any person summoned as a witness before the municipal court shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attend the trial, the judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to issue a rule nisi requiring the witness to show cause at a time and place stated therein why the witness should not be held in contempt of court. After hearing from the witness, the judge shall have the authority, if in his or her judgment the reason for non-attendance is insufficient, to hold the witness in contempt of court and punish the offense by a fine not to exceed $200.00 and/or imprisonment for a time not to exceed ten days, either or both, or in the alternative. 
Sec. 34-10. - Continuances.     Where the ends of justice may require, all cases may be continued. Applications for continuance shall be addressed to the sound discretion of the court, under the rules governing in the superior courts of the state. All motions in the municipal court for a continuance of any case where the defendant is at liberty on bond shall be made by the defendant, the defendant's attorney at law or attorney in fact, which designation shall not include the surety of defendant's appearance bond. Where an appearance bond has been forfeited and the forfeiture is subsequently set aside for cause, no further motion to continue the case for trial shall be entertained until a forfeiture fee as set forth in schedule of fees and charges has been paid. 
Sec. 34-11. - Holding defendant when court lacks jurisdiction.     If, after an investigation of any case, it should appear that the municipal court has no jurisdiction to determine it, the municipal court judge or the mayor shall require the defendant to enter into bond conditioned to appear before the next term of the court having jurisdiction, to answer such offense, which bond shall be turned over to the proper officer of such court. In default of such bond the municipal court judge or the mayor shall have power to commit the defendant to jail to answer the offense at the next term of court having jurisdiction thereof. 
Sec. 34-12. - Rules of practice.     The city shall have the opening and conclusion in each case unless the defendant introduces no evidence. The defendant shall then be entitled to the conclusion. The city shall announce first if it is ready for trial; and, if not, it shall be held to as strict a showing for continuances as the defendant. The rules of evidence and examination of witnesses shall be the same as in the superior court, so far as such rules are applicable to the case on trial. All officers, informers, and persons injured shall be competent witnesses. In general, the municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of practice governing the superior court, so far as they are applicable to municipal courts, and by a sound construction of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 34-13. - Guilty pleas.     Any party charged with the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city may file a plea of "guilty" under such rules as the court may direct. Upon a plea of guilty, the municipal court shall pass sentence or judgment in the case as may appear reasonable and proper. 
Sec. 34-14. - Minimum costs; working out.     In each case of a conviction in the municipal court, the costs assessable shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Costs shall go into the general fund of the city for general municipal purposes. Defendants unable to pay costs, and compelled in lieu of payment to work on the public works, shall be each required to work two days to cover costs. 
Sec. 34-15. - Contempt.     Any person who, during a session of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court or who refuses to abide by any sentence or order of the court shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
Sec. 34-16. - [Municipal court additional penalties.] (a)  In every case in which the Municipal Court of Ashburn, Georgia, shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any ordinance of the City of Ashburn, there shall be imposed upon such fine and costs an additional amount equal to ten percent of the fine and costs. (b)  At the time of posting bail or bond in any case pending in the Municipal Court of Ashburn, Georgia, involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the State of Georgia or of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of such bail or bond shall be posted. (c)  In every case in which the Municipal Court of Ashburn, Georgia, shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the amount of the forfeiture shall be paid over as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-94. (d)  The sums required by subsections (a), (b), and (c) shall be added and collected in addition to those sums required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be added and paid into the Peace Officers Annuity and Benefit Fund and by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia. (e)  The sums required to be collected pursuant to subsections (a), (b), and (c) shall be assessed and collected by the court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the governing authority of Turner County by the tenth of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums shall be deposited by Turner County into a special account to be known as the "county jail fund," and shall be expended for the purposes of constructing, operating and staffing the county jail of Turner County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. (f)  This section shall become effective and shall require collection of the additional amounts on fines and forfeitures commencing on the first day of the month immediately following its adoption. All conflicting ordinances or other provisions and parts thereof are repealed. (Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 1—6, 7-3-2014) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 1—6, adopted July 3, 2014, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 34-16 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 34-17. - Maximum term of appointed office for municipal court judge; service agreements. (a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless he or she shall be in compliance with the requirements of state law on qualifications to serve in such office, including but not limited to compliance with all applicable training requirements. (b)  All judges for the municipal court of the City of Ashburn shall be appointed by resolution of the city council that adopts or approves the service agreement with the judge. This service agreement shall include a term of service of no less than one year and no more than two years. The service agreement shall be approved by the city attorney as accurately describing the obligations of the judge and the independence of the court, and it shall identify obligations of the judge and of the city for oversight and management of court staff and court service providers. Unless the judge has been removed from office in the middle of the term as described below, the service agreement shall renew automatically for a subsequent term unless the city council, by resolution, appoints a successor judge to serve at the expiration of the then-current term. (c)  The judge, or any judge pro tempore serving in the absence of the judge, is solely responsible for judicial decisions. Judicial decisions include, but are not limited to, establishment of a standard bail schedule, determination of bail in individual cases, determination of financial ability, conditions of probation, determination of liability, and determination of eligibility for indigent defense and for alternatives to monetary penalties including community service and penalty or fine reductions. (d)  The judge is responsible for notifying the city manager and the city attorney of any resources or process changes that are required or appropriate in order for the court to operate in accordance with applicable law. (e)  The municipal court judge may engage in the private practice of law; provided, however, a judge may not appear and represent a client before the Ashburn Municipal Court. (f)  Before entering on duties of his or her office for the first time, an appointed judge shall take the following oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state:     "I swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as judge of the Municipal Court for the City of Ashburn, and will take only my lawful compensation. I do further swear (or affirm) that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this State, or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia; and that I am otherwise qualified to hold said office, according to the Constitution and Laws of Georgia; and that I will support the Constitutions of the United States and of this state." The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council, and the judge's name, contact information for business correspondence, and term of office shall be provided to the administrative office of the courts. (g)  A judge of the municipal court shall serve for the designated term in the service agreement but may be removed from the position, and the service agreement terminated during the term, by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the state judicial qualifications commission for: (1)  Willful misconduct in office; (2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; (3)  Habitual intemperance; (4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or (5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. (Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 3-1-2018) 
Secs. 34-18—34-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPEARANCE BOND 
Sec. 34-50. - Discretion of officer on duty as to certain bonds.     The officer on duty and in charge of the police station when any arrest is made may take bond with or without security, and, in his discretion, payable to the city, in any sum not exceeding $1,000.00 for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of the violation of any ordinance of the city to stand to and abide his trial, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced. 
Sec. 34-51. - Persons refusing to give bond.     If any arrested person or necessary witness shall fail to give the bond and security required of him/her, such person so refusing may be confined in the county jail or kept under guard so as to be present at trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
Sec. 34-52. - Designation of bail; procedure upon failure of bonded persons to appear.     Upon failure of any principal in any bond to appear where such principal is charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or upon the failure of any principal, who is a witness, to appear and testify as engaged, the judge of the municipal court shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond or recognizance to show cause before him/her on any date named therein, not to be less than a period of time as set by the judge of the municipal court from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond or recognizance and all costs of forfeiture. 
Sec. 34-53. - Service of rule to show cause.     Any member of the police force of the city shall serve a copy of the rule described in section 19-52, above, upon the principal and surety, if to be found in the city, personally or by leaving a copy at their usual place of abode, at least five days before the time named therein for hearing the cause. 
Sec. 34-54. - Entry of judgment against delinquent principal and sureties.     If no sufficient cause is shown to the contrary, the judge of the municipal court shall proceed to enter up judgment against the principal and sureties for the amount of such bond and costs, and the city clerk shall issue execution for the amount of the judgment and costs, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the judge, and place the same in the hands of the chief of police who shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale. 
Sec. 34-55. - Delivery of principal prior to judgment and forfeiture; release of surety.     Any surety upon any bail bond of any person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city may surrender his/her principal at any time before forfeiture to the chief of police, who shall confine such principal until discharged by order of the municipal court, or until such principal shall give other good and acceptable security and the delivery of the principal by the surety shall discharge such surety from all liability upon the bond. 
Sec. 34-56. - Sureties residing beyond the county.     No officer of the city shall accept on any bail bond any surety residing beyond the limits of the county, except as authorized by the city council, but in case such officer shall do so, the surety will be bound, and, upon entry of judgment against such surety, the judgment shall be collected as provided by law. 
Sec. 34-57. - Disposition of money pledges.     If the person arrested shall fail to appear at the place and time of trial so appointed, it shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to declare any pledge forfeited and to order the money to be paid into the city treasury as in other fines and forfeitures if it has not already been deposited in such treasury. If the person so arrested shall appear as engaged and is adjudged not guilty, the money and the property thus deposited shall be ordered by the court delivered up to the person depositing the same. Should any accused person be adjudged guilty and fined upon trial, the amount of the fine and costs of the trial shall be paid into the city treasury, and the remainder, if any, refunded to the accused or to the person entitled thereto. 
Secs. 34-58—34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDIGENT DEFENSE COUNCIL AND OFFICE OF PROSECUTOR[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-08, §§ 1—6, adopted July 1, 2003, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 34-76—34-81 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 34-76. - [Indigent defense council office established; appointment.]     There is hereby established for the municipal court of the City of Ashburn the office of indigent defense counsel. Said position shall be filled each year by the mayor and council at their first regular official meeting of the calendar year, for a term of one year, and until a successor has been appointed. All persons appointed to this position shall be members in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall be licensed and qualified to practice law in the State of Georgia. Should the mayor and council fail to appoint a successor, the incumbent shall continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, and until a successor is appointed. The compensation of such appointee shall be fixed by the mayor and council by agreement with the appointee. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 1, 7-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-77. - [Duties.]     It shall be the duty of indigent defense counsel to attend each session of the municipal court at which there will be arraignments and/or trials of cases involving the violation of city ordinances and/or state laws, and to represent and defend the accused person in all cases and/or arraignments where appointed and directed by the court to do so. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 2, 7-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-78. - [Office of prosecutor established; appointment.] (a)  There is hereby established for the Municipal Court of the City of Ashburn, Georgia the office of prosecutor. Said position shall be filled each year by the mayor and council at their first regular official meeting of the calendar year for a term of one year and until a successor has been appointed. All persons appointed to this position shall be members of in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall be licensed and qualified to practice law in the State of Georgia. Should the mayor and council fail to appoint a successor, the incumbent shall continue to serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council, and until a successor is appointed. The compensation of such appointee shall be fixed by the mayor and council by agreement with the appointee. (b)  Upon appointment, the prosecutor of the municipal court shall take and subscribe to the following oath: I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the City of Ashburn. (c)  Upon appointment of prosecutor or a successor and within 30 days thereafter, it shall be the duty of the clerk of municipal court, or such other person as designated by the city council to notify the prosecuting attorneys council of the State of Georgia of the name of the person appointed. (d)  The office of prosecutor of municipal court shall be part-time and the prosecutor may engage in the private practice of law, but shall not practice or appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Ashburn or appear in any matter in which he/she has exercised jurisdiction. (e)  If the prosecutor of municipal court is disqualified from engaging in the prosecution of a particular case or is unable to perform the duties of said office due to illness or incapacity, the city council shall appoint a substitute prosecuting attorney. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 3, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 12-02, § 1(Exh. A), 5-3-2012) 
Sec. 34-79. - [Duties.] (a)  It shall be the duty of the prosecutor to attend each session of the municipal court at which there will be arraignments and/or trials of cases involving violation of city ordinances and/or state laws and to prosecute the trial of said cases where directed by the court to do so. (b)  In addition to the duties specified herein above, the prosecutor of municipal court shall be charged with those duties and authorities provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 4, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 12-02, § 2(Exh. A), 5-3-2012) 
Sec. 34-80. - [Representation by indigent defense counsel.]     In every criminal proceeding in the municipal court, both at arraignments and at trial, in which imprisonment is provided by law as a possible punishment, where the accused is not otherwise represented by counsel, and where the judge determines that the accused is financially unable to employ counsel, the court shall appoint and direct indigent defense counsel to represent such accused. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 5, 7-1-2003) 
Sec. 34-81. - [Fees assessed.]     At their first regular official meeting of each calendar year the mayor and council shall, by the method hereinafter set forth, establish a fee to be added as costs in every criminal case disposed of by the court, whether by trial or by plea, and in every bond forfeiture declared by the court, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the municipal court to add said costs in every case as above provided in addition to all other costs, fines, fees and forfeitures. The amount of said cost, to be fixed each year as above provided, shall be determined as follows: The total amounts paid to the prosecutor and to indigent defense counsel during the preceding calendar year shall be divided by the total number of all criminal cases processed by the court for the preceding calendar year, including trials, pleas, and bond forfeitures, and the result of that computation shall be the fee to be added as costs as hereinbefore provided during the ensuing calendar year. (Ord. No. 04-08, § 4 [6], 7-1-2003) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; historical preservation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c); nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13; authority to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-13, adopted Sept. 2, 2004, amended the title of art. II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article title pertained to similar subject matter. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 38-31. - Purpose.     This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition, and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures; establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings, buildings, structures, and surrounding premises safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation; promoting and protecting the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire hazard; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings; authorizing the inspection of dwellings and structures; providing for the condemnation of all buildings and structures deemed unfit for human use and habitation and providing for removal of such buildings at public expense after hearing; and for other purposes. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.1, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-32. - Definitions.     Accessory structure means a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the primary dwelling or structure and which is attached thereto or located on the same lot. "Accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, any portable, demountable, or permanent enclosure, shade structure, and carport or garage.     Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction.     Applicable codes mean: (1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; and (3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A., Chapter 2 of Title 8, after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law.     Approved means approved by the city.     Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.     Boardinghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which the owner or operator rents space to five or more persons with one or more meals regularly served as part of the rental or for a separate charge.     Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.     Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry.     Dangerous structure means any of the following: (1)  Abandoned or vacant structure that constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which the structure is located and which is not fenced in or otherwise protected to reasonably prohibit public access thereto. (2)  A structure that is severely damaged by fire, storm or other natural or manmade causes and which has remained in such damaged condition for a period of six months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. (3)  A structure that is in a condition of being partially constructed and construction thereon has ceased for a period of 12 months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. (4)  Any combination of the foregoing which would constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of any person living or property located adjacent thereto.     Department means the office of the city manager, the office of the environmental code enforcement officer of the city, the city police department, or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce the provisions of this article.     Director means the environmental code enforcement officer or the representative thereof. When a department other than the Office of the environmental code enforcement officer is designated to enforce this article, the term means the director of that department or the designee of such director.     Domestic sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designated or intended to dispose of domestic sewage which includes byproducts of domestic activities.     Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, as amended from time to time, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act.     The words "dwellings, buildings, or structures," used singly or in conjunction with each other, mean any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms 'dwellings, buildings, or structures' shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products.     Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, whether or not such unit is occupied or vacant.     Egress means a means of exit from a structure or dwelling unit.     Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods.     Family means two or more persons living together, whether related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and having common housekeeping facilities.     Floor space means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.     Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the floor level.     Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers, and newspapers.     Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Ashburn.     Grade means the average elevation of the ground adjoining a building or structure.     Habitable room means any room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.     Heated water means water which has been heated sufficiently to ensure a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the outlets.     Inspection warrant means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such search or inspection is necessary for the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article.     Interested party means (a) the owner; (b) those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (c) those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; (d) any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court, provided, the term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and (e) persons in possession of said property and premises.     Junked vehicle means any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck, or other vehicle or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate.     Maintenance means the act of keeping buildings, structures, and equipment in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline or failure.     Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq.     Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit, designed for long-term occupancy, which has been prefabricated and then transported to its site or to a sales lot on its own wheels and requires only minor work before occupancy, such as connection to utilities or a foundation.     Multiple dwelling means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other, each doing its own cooking in such dwelling. 'Multiple dwelling' includes a flat or apartment.     Municipality means any incorporated city within the State of Georgia.     Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking, eating, or having actual possession of a dwelling or rooming unit.     Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.     Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.     Plumbing means the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, repair, extension, and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting systems and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, repair, extension, or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other approved terminal.     Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including dwellings, buildings, or structures thereon.     Proper or properly means in accordance with the general provisions of this article and in accordance with standards of cleanliness, stability, and safety as required by this article.     Property means land and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed thereto.     Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality.     Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through and including § 41-2-17, this ordinance, and by ordinances adopted under O. C. G. A. §§ 41-2-7 through and including 41-2-17, to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers.     Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure.     Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose.     Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.     Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes.     Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease.     Sanitary sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, and clothes washing machine.     Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure.     Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.     Trash means nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery, and similar materials.     Unfit for human habitation means designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public.     Unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not necessarily for cooking or eating purposes.     Unsanitary condition means the presence of a condition which is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or is conducive to harboring insects, rodents, or other pests.     Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space.     Water and sewer system includes private wells, public water utility mains, private septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, and public sewer mains.     Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable ordinances. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.2, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-33. - Article remedial.     This article is remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, rooming houses, buildings, structures, premises, or properties. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.3, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-34. - Scope and application. (a)  Every building, dwelling, or structure in the incorporated area of the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. Every such building, structure, and premises shall be subject to and conform with the requirements of this article. When a unit is vacant, the full application of the article may be held in abeyance for an indefinite period, provided the exterior complies with this article, the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish, and debris, and the unit has been secured in a manner approved by the city and is maintained in that closed and inaccessible manner until it is fully repaired. Where applicable, this article also governs the condition of unimproved property. (b)  Repairs and alterations in restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering such building in conformity with this article in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard may be made with approved materials similar in kind to those of which such building is constructed. (c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance. (d)  Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work shall be done only in accordance with those ordinances. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.4, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-35. - Violations.     A person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with this article is guilty of an offense punishable as provided in the City Charter. The owner of a building, structure, or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and all persons who may have caused or assisted in causing the commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.5, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-36. - Penalties.     Any person, firm, or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the City Charter. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.6, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-37. - Unsafe, unsanitary, etc., structures prohibited.     All dwellings, buildings, or other structures which are unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to human life or which, in relation to existing uses, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment are unlawful. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.7, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-38. - Weeds, junk, etc., prohibited. (a)  Persons shall keep their property free of those weeds and underbrush which create a health menace, fire hazard, or an unsafe or unsanitary condition as well as trash, garbage, junked vehicles, junked or abandoned appliances, or other things thereon which constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or occupant of a dwelling, rooming house, building, or structure to use the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, household appliance, glass, building material, building trash, or similar item. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of such owner, operator, or occupant to maintain the premises of such property and to remove from the premises all abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, and garbage, upon notice from the city. In this subsection "abandoned motor vehicle" means (1) a motor vehicle that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of moving under its own power, or (2) a motor vehicle having no valid current license tag registration. (c)  Owners and occupants of property shall not permit weeds or grass within 150 feet of any building or structure to grow on such property to a height exceeding 18 inches. (d)  Owners and tenants of property or structures abutting a street, sidewalk, lane, or parking area on which the property or structure abuts shall maintain the property or structure clean and free of garbage and trash; however, city maintenance responsibility for public rights-of-way shall not be diminished by this section. (e)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of the items prohibited by this section shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owners and tenants of these premises. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.8, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-39. - Compliance prerequisite to utility services for substandard dwelling.     Electrical utility service shall not be reconnected to any vacant building or dwelling unit which is unfit for human habitation and has been without electrical utility service until such building or dwelling unit has been brought into compliance with this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.9, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-40. - Demolition of structures. (a)  Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all utilities are cut off and capped at the street. (b)  All debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble, and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the premises. (c)  Any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.10, 9-2-2004) 
Secs. 38-41—38-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 38-51. - Enforcement generally. (a)  The department shall enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the department are vested with the police power necessary for the purpose of issuing charges and prosecuting persons charged with violating this article. (b)  The department shall receive applications and issue permits and certificates required by this article. The department shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this article are met. The department shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of properties, buildings, equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. The department shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this article and render written reports on the same. The department shall issue notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this article, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions or to secure the necessary safeguards. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.20, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-52. - Coordination of enforcement.     Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the exclusive responsibility of the department. Wherever, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other department, the director shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders. An order for correction of any violation under this article shall not be issued without the approval of the director, who shall have the responsibility before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.21, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-53. - Civil liability.     No officer or member of the city council or employee of the city, charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of duties, shall be rendered liable personally; and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.22, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-54. - Notice of violations, etc. (a)  Upon receipt of information that property, premises, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment covered by this article are unsafe, or are otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city relating to the condition of property and premises, the department shall cause to be made an inspection. If it is found that an unsafe condition exists, the department shall cause a written notice to be served as hereinafter provided. (b)  The notice shall include the following: (1)  An enumeration of conditions which the department has determined are in violation of this article. (2)  An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation. (3)  A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed, such period of time for completion to be determined by the department as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the completion of the remedial action. (4)  A statement adequate to notify the person served that a failure to comply with the provisions of this article within the time specified in the notice is unlawful and the penalty for such failure. (c)  A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the director. (d)  Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant as may be appropriate in any of the following ways: (1)  In person. (2)  By certified mail with return receipt attached and posting a copy of the notice upon the property. (e)  Whenever the department determines that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this article is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, stored, maintained, or demolished in violation of this article, the department shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefore directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation. (f)  In case such notice or order is not complied with, the department may issue a citation for violation of this article or may request the city attorney or other proper prosecuting authority to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to correct or remove such violation, or restrain the execution of work thereon, or prevent the use of any building, system, appliance, or equipment in violation of this article or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto. (g)  A purchaser, transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a notice shall be bound by such notice as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease, or mortgage. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.23, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-55. - Inspections. (a)  Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the department. Upon evidence of probable cause and presentation of proper credentials, authorized agents of the department may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city in order to enforce this article. (b)  Any property, building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city shall be subject to inspection by the department. (c)  No official or employee of the department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.24, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-56. - Inspection warrant. (a)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this article. The warrant shall authorize the director or agents thereof to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this article. (b)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the municipal court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: (1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. (2)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this article. (c)  The inspection warrant shall be issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: (1)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. (2)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. (3)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. (4)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.25, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-57. - Owner's right of entry.     Every occupant of a building, dwelling, or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling, or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article, or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.26, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-58. - Records.     The department shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificate issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the department but shall not be removed from the office of the director. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.27, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-59. - Stopping work.     Whenever the department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.28, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-60. - Placarding premises. (a)  The department may place a dated and signed placard on property which is in violation of this article, and notify the owner of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address that the building has been placarded. Such notice shall specify the reason therefor and the owner's right of appeal as provided in this chapter. Such placard shall contain the following words: "The City of Ashburn has declared this building dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The use or habitation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (b)  It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises or for an owner to allow occupancy of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded, if such dwelling, structure, or premises is, or becomes, vacant after placarding or, in all events, within 60 days from the date of placarding unless the violation has been corrected. (c)  The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the department shall be notice to the general public that it is unlawful for any owner to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall be required to be given to any subsequent owner. (d)  It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover, or remove such placards. The department shall remove the placards when compliance with this article has been effected. (e)  If the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure and clean the premises, the department may proceed under section 38-62 et seq. hereof. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.29, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-61. - Correction of violation by city at expense of property owners—Generally.     In the event the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close and/or repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure and/or clean the premises, or remedy any other condition found to exist in violation of this article or any other relevant ordinance of the city, any further proceedings against the interested parties and/or the property shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 38-62 et seq., as herein amended. In addition thereto, the department may, in addition to other remedies, issue a citation for violating any requirements or provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.30, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-62. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. (a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. (b)  The mayor and council appoint or designate the city environmental code enforcement officer or his/her designee(s) as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. (c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any property, dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and/or is not in compliance with applicable codes or exists in violation thereof, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer determines from investigation or inspection that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue and file in the municipal court a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such property, dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties or any of them shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (d)  If after such notice and hearing the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or that there exist on the property other conditions which are in violation of this article or other relevant ordinances of the city, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: (1)  In cases involving structures or buildings on the property, if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove said dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property.     For purposes of these two sub-paragraphs, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 43 of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. (3)  In cases involving violations other than buildings or structures on the property, the court shall order the owner or other person before the court to abate the condition by mowing, cutting, or removal, as the case may be. No officer or member of the city council or employee of the city, charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of duties, shall be rendered liable personally; and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. (e)  If the owner or other person before the court fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, or to abate the condition, as the case may be, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, and/or demolished, or the conditions existing in violation abated as provided in said order. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of the time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. (g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (1)  The lien provided for in the foregoing paragraph shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, demolition, or other abatement in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Turner County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 38-64 of this article. The clerk of Superior Court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(1), shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Turner County and shall enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. (2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions under this ordinance shall transfer to the city tax collector a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, closure, or other action. It shall be the duty of the city tax collector to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing any tax foreclosure shall not apply. The City tax collector shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the City. (3)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the city tax collector of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. (4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and/or the city tax collector in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. (5)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (6)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the Superior Court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (7)  The public officers designated herein may, in addition to the powers herein granted, issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, option building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this ordinance. (8)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.31, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-63. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances.     The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he or she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): (1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; (2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; (3)  Dilapidation; (4)  Disrepair; (5)  Structural defects; (6)  Uncleanliness; (7)  The existence of other conditions of the premises which are in violation of this ordinance or other relevant ordinances of the city, such as, without limitation, the existence of weeds, junk, garbage, and trash on the premises which affect the health and/or safety of the property and/or the occupants of the premises and/or other persons residing in the city; and (8)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment.     The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.32, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-64. - Service of complaints.     Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: (1)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and a copy shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. (2)  For any interested party whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. (3)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. (4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice of the proceedings. (5)  Enforcement of the lien shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-7, as well as other applicable provisions of this ordinance and state law. In the event of conflict between any of the provisions of this article and state law, state law shall govern. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.33, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-65. - Powers of public officers.     The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: (1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; (2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; (3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making exazminations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; (4)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this ordinance to such officers and agents as may be provided by the city; and (5)  The department is authorized to utilize the in rem enforcement and abatement procedures, including the lis pendens, the issuance of liens and the recording and collection of same, provided by sections 38-63 through 38-65 inclusive of this article in all cases where there exist on the property junk, weeds, grass, junked or abandoned appliances, junked or abandoned automobiles, garbage, trash, or any other conditions which are in noncompliance with or in violation of this article, or any other applicable ordinances, codes, or laws; and the provisions of said sections shall apply fully to the abatement of such conditions. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.34, 9-2-2004) 
Secs. 38-66—38-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES 
Sec. 38-101. - Compliance.     No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for any use or occupancy, any dwelling, building, or structure, or any portion thereof, which does not comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.40, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-102. - Sanitary facilities. (a)  Generally. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall contain not less than a lavatory and a water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every dwelling unit shall, in addition, contain a kitchen sink and a tub or shower connected as aforesaid. Every plumbing fixture and wastewater pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. (b)  Location. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling, building, and structure and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user. (c)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have connected to the lavatory and, where applicable, to the kitchen sink, tub, and shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. (d)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. (e)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit therein at a distance three feet above floor level under ordinary minimum winter conditions. Where a gas or electric central heating system is not provided, each dwelling, building, and structure shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to furnish a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter conditions. (f)  Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.41, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-103. - Electrical systems.     All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed, and connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the adopted electrical code of the city. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.42, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-104. - Light and ventilation. (a)  Electrical lights and outlets required. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet. Every kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, corridor or hallway, and porch shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be property installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. (b)  Light in public halls and stairway. Every public hall and stairway in every dwelling, building, and structure containing five or more units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.43, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-105. - Exterior and interior of structures. (a)  Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. In the case of a mobile home, the undercarriage of the mobile home shall be completely enclosed by the foundation or stand, or by a permanent skirt if no foundation or stand is utilized. (b)  Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. (c)  Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. (d)  Means of egress. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. (e)  Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto of every structure used for human habitation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. (f)  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. (g)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. (h)  Windows to be glazed. Windowpanes or an approved substitute shall be maintained without holes. (i)  Window sash. Window sash shall be properly fitted and weather tight within the window frame. (j)  Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. (k)  Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling. Each door available as an exit shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside. (l)  Interior floor, walls, and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. (m)  Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. (n)  Structural supports. Every structural element shall be maintained structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.44, 9-2-2004) 
Sec. 38-106. - Sanitation. (a)  Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling, building, and structure containing two or more units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas and the premises thereof. (b)  Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, building, and structure and premises thereof which such person occupies and controls or which is provided for such person's particular use. (c)  Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall dispose of garbage and any other organic waste, which might provide food for rodents, and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage containers. (d)  Extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling, building, and structure in a reasonable ratproof and insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. (e)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any dwelling, building, and structure located thereon. (f)  Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. (Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1.45, 9-2-2004) 
Secs. 38-107—38-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Sections I—X of Ord. No. 12-05, adopted Oct. 4, 2012, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 38-136—38-145, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 04-17, §§ I—X, adopted Aug. 5, 2004. 
Sec. 38-136. - Title.     This article will be known as "The City of Ashburn Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. No. 12-05, § I, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-137. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.     Board means the board of natural resources.     Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).     CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).     Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc.     Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.     District means the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.     Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. tit. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 38-139(c) of this article.     Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.     Final stabilization means all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 38-138(5).     Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.     NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.     Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.     Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).     State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation.     Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."     Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or (2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass.     Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia."     Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. No. 12-05, § II, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-138. - Exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 38-139(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. No. 12-05, § III, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-139. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in [subsections] (c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; (15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (Ord. No. 12-05, § IV, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-140. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, without first obtaining a permit from the zoning administer to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the zoning administer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 38-139(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. (3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 38-139(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) [of this section], have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 38-139(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 38-139(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) [of this section] are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). (Ord. No. 12-05, § V, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-141. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. No. 12-05, § VI, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-142. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop-work orders. (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and (3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 38-140(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. (1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. No. 12-05, § VII, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-143. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. (Ord. No. 12-05, § VIII, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-144. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Ashburn City Council within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Turner County. (Ord. No. 12-05, § IX, 10-4-2012) 
Sec. 38-145. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 4th day of October, 2012. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. 12-05, § X, 10-4-2012) 
Secs. 38-146—38-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION ORDINANCE[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-12, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 5, 2004, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 38-201—38-206 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 38-201. - Short title and purpose. (a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." (b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-202. - Definitions.     When used in this article the following words and phrases shall be the meanings given in this section:     Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: (1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or (2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.     Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.     Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 2, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-203. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone.     There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 3, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-204. - Permitted uses.     The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: (1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and (2)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 4, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-205. - Prohibited uses.     The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 38-204 of this article: (1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; (2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; (3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 38-204 of the article; (4)  Sanitary landfills; (5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; (6)  Storm water infiltration basins; (7)  Underground storage tanks; (8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 5, 8-5-2004) 
Sec. 38-206. - Administration.     The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. No. 04-12, § 6, 8-5-2004) 
Secs. 38-207—38-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR WATER USE ORDINANCE[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-10, §§ 1—4, adopted July 1, 2004, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 38-231—38-234 was at the editor's discretion. Further, section 2 of said ordinance states: This ordinance shall become effective on August 1, 2004, or upon the date that the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division determines that mandatory water restrictions shall be enforced within the State of Georgia, or whichever is later. Provided, further, this ordinance shall not become effective should the City of Ashburn be granted an exception to the water restrictions contained herein by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
Sec. 38-231. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.     Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. (Ord. No. 04-10, § 1, 7-1-2004) 
Sec. 38-232. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods.     Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: (1)  Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursday, and Sundays. (2)  Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. (3)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use, other than activities exempted in section 38-234 hereof, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. (Ord. No. 04-10, § 2, 7-1-2004) 
Sec. 38-233. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels.     City shall enforce drought response levels as declared by the director of the environmental protection division. (1)  Declared drought response level one. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. c.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing is prohibited. (2)  Declared drought response level two. Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. a.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. b.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. c.  The following uses are prohibited: i.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing. ii.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. (3)  Declared drought response level three. Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. a.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. b.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. c.  The following uses are prohibited: i.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety, or flushing, ii.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, butters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. iii.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. iv.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. v.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. vi.  Non-commercial fund-raisers, such as car washes. vii.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. (4)  Declared drought response level four. No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 38-234 below or as the EPD director may order. (Ord. No. 04-10, § 3, 7-1-2004) 
Sec. 38-234. - Exemptions. (a)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. (2)  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. (b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: (1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. (2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. (c)  Newly installed landscapes (in place less than 30 days) are subject to the following: (1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. (2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. (d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: (1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. (2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. (3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two, and three. (4)  Irrigation of greens. (e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: (1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: During installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. (2)  Irrigation contractors: During installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. (3)  Sod producers. (4)  Ornamental growers. (5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. (6)  Retail garden centers. (7)  Hydro-seeding. (8)  Power-washing. (9)  Construction sites. (10)  Producers of food and fiber. (11)  Car washes. (12)  Other activities essential to daily business. (13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. (Ord. No. 04-10, § 4, 7-1-2004) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 30; unauthorized use of fire hydrants, § 62-5. State Law reference— Impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Sprinkler Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-11-1 et seq.; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detector requirements, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; local fire safety standards authorized, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a); fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Volunteer firefighters, § 2-62. 
Sec. 42-31. - Generally.     The fire department shall consist of a chief and staffing as deemed appropriate by the city council. (Code 1983, § 8-16) 
Secs. 42-32—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BURNING ORDINANCE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-02, §§ 1—5, adopted July 6, 2006, did not specifically amend this Code but is treated as amending art. III, §§ 42-61—42-66, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. 
Sec. 42-61. - Burning permitted; prohibited.     Subject to the procedures, rules and regulations hereinafter set forth, burning of natural vegetation (trees, brush, stumps, grass, shrubs, etc.) for land clearing can be allowed. However, it is illegal to burn household garbage, plastics, tires, asphalt materials, construction materials, processed lumber, petroleum products, other manmade materials, or hazardous materials/waste products. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-62. - Permit procedures.     On the form supplied by the city, persons desiring to burn natural vegetation will submit a completed application for a burn permit to Ashburn Fire and Emergency Services. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 2, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 43-63. - Burn requirements and conditions. (a)  The location of the burn must be a minimum of 500 feet from structures or public streets unless otherwise varied/allowed by the city fire chief. (b)  Only natural vegetation (trees, bush, stumps, grass, shrubs, etc.) that contains small amounts of soil shall be burned. (c)  Open land burning if permitted will require a plowed fire break, and the burn permit recipient must take the necessary measures to ensure that the fire does not spread onto the property of others. (d)  Permitted burning must not be left unattended at any time. (e)  Burn permits may only be issued to property owner or tenant. However, tenants must have written permission from the property's owner before a permit will be issued. (f)  Burn permits will not be issued to demolish a standing structure. (g)  Pit and blower may be required for large scale burning. (h)  Contractors will be required to be adequately licensed and bonded, and provide a certificate of insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 or more prior to being issued a burn permit. (i)  Property owners and/or tenants must have adequate insurance to cover damage to the property of others in case of fire spread. (j)  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, paper goods, petroleum products, or asphalt based or impregnated materials may not be used to start or maintain the operation of the burn. (k)  Construction materials or manmade materials can not be burned. (l)  Prevailing winds must be in a direction away from any residential areas near the proposed burn area. (m)  Humidity must be such that residual smoke will not settle to surrounding ground areas. (n)  Burning will not commence prior to one hour after sunrise local time and must be extinguished by one hour prior to sundown local time. (o)  Burn permits will not be issued during times of drought or "statewide no burn" advisories from the Georgia Forestry Commission. (p)  Ashburn Fire and Emergency Services will have the authority to stop the burn at any time should any of the above conditions not be met. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 3, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-64. - Fees and charges. (a)  A burn permit will be issued at no charge. (b)  If the burn permit recipient desires or the Ashburn Fire Chief deems it necessary for the Ashburn Fire and Emergency Services to be present during burning times, the burn permit recipient will be charged a standby fee of $50.00 per hour. (c)  A suppression fee of $500.00 will be charged for unauthorized burning. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 4, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 42-65. - Trial of violators.     The presiding officer of the Ashburn Municipal Court shall have the power and authority to try all offenses and violations against the laws and ordinance of the city and, upon conviction, to punish offenders by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, by imprisonment for any period not exceeding six months, or by compulsory work on the streets or upon any of the public works of the city for any period not exceeding six months, or by any combination of such penalties, as the presiding officer of the court may decide. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 5, 7-6-2006) 
Chapter 46 - FLOODS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-04, arts. 1—6, adopted Aug. 6, 2009, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 46-31—46-42, 46-61—46-64, and 46-91—46-95, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 2, 1997. 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
Sec. 46-31. - Authorization.     Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Ashburn, Georgia, does ordain as follows: (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 1, § A, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-32. - Findings of fact. (a)  The flood hazard areas of Ashburn, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 1, § B, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-33. - Statement of purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 1, § C, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-34. - Objectives.     The objectives of this article are: (1)  To protect human life and health; (2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; (4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects; (5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and (7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 1, § D, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-35. - Definitions.     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.     Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like.     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction."     Appeal means a request for a review of the building department's interpretation of any provision of this article.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 46-52.     Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: (1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; (2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.     Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 3, 2009 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community].     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before October 2, 1997 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community].     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 3, 2009 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after October 2, 1997 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after October 2, 1997.     North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any article requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed.     For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article.     Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 6, 8-6-2009) 
Secs. 46-36—46-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 46-51. - Lands to which this article applies.     This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Ashburn, Georgia. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § A, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-52. - Basis for area of special flood hazard.     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 3, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article.     For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated August 3, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for [the] City of Ashburn are hereby adopted by reference.     Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (Unknown)     The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Ashburn City Hall, 259 East Washington Avenue, Ashburn, Georgia. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § B, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-53. - Establishment of development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § C, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-54. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § D, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-55. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § E, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-56. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1)  Considered as minimum requirements; (2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § F, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-57. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of City of Ashburn or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § G, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-58. - Penalties for violation.     Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $(subject to court) or imprisoned for not more than (subject to court) days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Ashburn, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 2, § H, 8-6-2009) 
Secs. 46-59—46-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 46-71. - Designation of article administrator.     The building department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 3, § A, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-72. - Permit procedures.     Application for a development permit shall be made to the building department on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities.     Specifically, the following information is required: (1)  Application stage. a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 46-82(2); d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and (2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building department (Mike Mastrario) shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 3, § B, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-73. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.     Duties of the enforcement and permits shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. (2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. (3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. (4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-52, then the building department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. (5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 46-72(2). (6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 46-72(2). (7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 46-72(1)c. and 46-82(2), or 46-84(2). (8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. (9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. (12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building department and shall be open for public inspection. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 3, § C, 8-6-2009) 
Secs. 46-74—46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sec. 46-81. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. (5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; (7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; (8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; (9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § A, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-82. - Specific standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4), "Elevated buildings." a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. (2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 46-73(7). (3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 1.  Individual lots or parcels; 2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (reference subsection 46-81(6) above). d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections 46-82(3)a. [and] c. above. (4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-52, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § B, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-83. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-52, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 46-52, then the building department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: (2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4) "Elevated buildings." a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The building department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § C, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-84. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways.     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-52, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: (1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. (2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 46-82. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § D, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-85. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).     Areas of special flood hazard established in section 46-52, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood-depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood-depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 46-81(4), "Elevated buildings." The building department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 46-72(1)c. and 46-72(2). (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § E, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-86. - Standards for subdivisions. (a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; (c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and (d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § F, 8-6-2009) 
Sec. 46-87. - Standards for critical facilities. (a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 4, § G, 8-6-2009) 
Secs. 46-88—46-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
Sec. 46-101. - [Variance procedures.] (a)  The planning advisory commission as established by the City of Ashburn shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. (b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building department (Mike Mastrario) in the enforcement or administration of this article. (c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning advisory commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Turner County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. (d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning advisory commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (h)  Conditions for variances: (1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (4)  The building department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning advisory commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Ord. No. 09-04, art. 5, 8-6-2009) 