Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.     The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Ashburn, Georgia," and may be so cited. (Code 1983, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction.     In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following definitions and rules of construction shall govern unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:     Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed to the bond, they shall be bound by the bond.     Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Ashburn, Georgia.     City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Ashburn, Georgia.     City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" shall mean the city council of Ashburn, Georgia.     Code. The term "code" shall mean the Code of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1.     Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.     Corporate limits. The term "corporate limits" shall mean the corporate limits of the City of Ashburn.     County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Turner.     Court. The term "court" shall mean the municipal court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the court shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law.     Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise.     Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.     Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them unless it is otherwise declared.     Month, year. The terms "month" and "year" shall mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided.     Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Ashburn" were added.     Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter.     Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded.     Oath. The term "oath" shall include affirmation.     O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended.     Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it.     Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination, as well as to natural persons.     Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance.     Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property.     Shall, may. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; the term "may" is permissive.     Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons.     State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" is used, it shall refer to the State of Georgia.     Street. The term "street" shall include streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the city unless otherwise provided.     Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory of this Code, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance unless expressly so provided.     Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future.     Writing. The term "writing" shall include printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations, and printed or written designs. (Code 1983, § 1-2) State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references and editor's notes. (a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. (Code 1983, § 1-3) State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. (a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. (b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1983, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code.     It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. (Code 1983, § 1-10) State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. (a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by their omission from reprinted pages affected. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. (b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. (c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, substantially the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. (d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. (Code 1983, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code.     It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. (Code 1983, § 1-7) State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. (a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. (b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. (c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: (1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. (2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. (3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. (4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). (5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. (a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. (b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.     The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations of such ordinances and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code.     Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: (1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. (2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. (3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. (4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. (5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. (6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. (7)  Any appropriation ordinance. (8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. (9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. (10)  Any zoning ordinance. (11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. (12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. (13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. (14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. (15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. (16)  The city's development regulations. (17)  The city's purchasing policies and procedures. No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this chapter, and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations.     Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in such person or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; preemption of ordinances to general law, Ga. Const. art. III, § III, ¶ IV. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); administration and enforcement of animal regulations, § 14-31 et seq.; administration of property numbering regulations, § 18-66; civil emergencies, ch. 30; courts, ch. 34; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 46-61 et seq.; administration of wellhead protection regulations, § 50-36; law enforcement, ch. 58; planning, ch. 66; Greater Turner planning advisory commission, § 66-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 86; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, app. A, § 11; zoning board of appeals, app. A, § 12. State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 2-1. - Departments created.     The following departments are created for the city: (1)  Police; (2)  Fire; (3)  Water; (4)  Sewer; (5)  Gas; (6)  Streets and sanitation; (7)  E-911; and (8)  Recreation. 
Sec. 2-2. - Records management. (a)  Those Local Government Records Retention Schedules as promulgated by the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia, as amended from time to time, and found on the following website: http:/sos.georgia.gov.archives/pdf/state_spec_reports/Local_Government_Schedules_Nov_07.pdf,; are hereby approved and adopted as records retention schedules for the city. (b)  The city clerk is responsible for records management activities and is charged with the responsibility for directing and coordinating all records management matters. (c)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. (d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city clerk which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. (Ord. No. 08-12, §§ 1—4, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-3. - Director of public safety.     In lieu of appointing a police chief and a separate fire chief, the city council may combine the leadership of the police and fire department under a director of public safety. The director of public safety shall be both the fire chief and the police chief and shall carry out the duties of the chief of each department as determined by ordinance and law. (Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 6-7-2018) 
Secs. 2-4—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-31. - Meetings.     The regular meetings of the city council shall be on the first Thursday night in each month at 6:00 p.m. at the city hall, 259 E. Washington Ave., Ashburn, GA. (Code 1983, § 2-16; Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 11-6-2008) State Law reference— Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-32. - Agenda items.     Items to be placed on the agenda for any regular council meeting shall be submitted to the city clerk by the close of business on the Friday before the next meeting. State Law reference— Agenda requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e). 
Sec. 2-33. - Attendance by members.     It shall be the duty of the mayor and councilmembers to attend all meetings of the council. For failure to do so, without good excuse, they may be dealt with as the council shall see proper. (Code 1983, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-34. - [Review and approval of minutes of executive sessions of the mayor and council.] (a)  The Open Meetings Act of the State of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)C, as amended, provides that: (1)  Minutes of executive sessions shall be recorded but shall not be open to the public; and (2)  Such minutes shall specify each issue discussed in executive session, and if matters subject to the attorney-client privilege are discussed, the fact that an attorney client discussion occurred and its subject matter shall [be] identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded and shall not be identified in the minutes; (3)  Such minutes shall be kept and preserved for "in camera" inspection by an appropriate court should a dispute arise as to the propriety of any executive session. (b)  Minutes may be made and records kept by the city clerk or by a person temporarily appointed by the mayor to take such minutes so long as the minutes accurately reflect the record of the meeting. (c)  The mayor and council of the City of Ashburn designate the city clerk, or, at the option of the mayor, the mayor's designee, to record minutes of an executive session of the mayor and council. (d)  Prior to the conclusion of the executive session, the mayor, if he or she attends the session, and all members of the council attending the session shall review the minutes recorded. (e)  Following the conclusion of the executive session, and upon approval of such minutes by a majority of the mayor and council in an open meeting, the minutes of the executive session recorded and approved in accord with the terms hereof and as noted on the minutes shall be transmitted to the city clerk to be placed in proper form and kept in a confidential file and preserved for "in camera" inspection in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)C. (Res. No. 2012-08, 12-6-2012) Editor's note— Res. No. 2012-08, adopted Dec. 6, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-34 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-35. - Weapons prohibited at meetings.     As used herein, the term "weapon" shall have the same meaning as set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-125.1.     As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127, and except as specifically exempted below, all individuals are prohibited from carrying or possessing a weapon at any meeting of the City of Ashburn City Council. This policy shall apply to all individuals, including city employees, officers, and council members. The restrictions contained herein shall also apply to all employees, including those employees that hold a Georgia weapons carry license.     In order to enforce the provisions contained herein, and pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127(e)(1), ingress into any building in which a meeting of the City of Ashburn City Council will be held shall be restricted and screened by security personnel for the time period spanning 30 minutes prior to the meeting until 15 minutes following the conclusion of the meeting. At least one such of security personnel shall be a certified peace officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 35, Chapter 8.     The restrictions contained herein shall not apply to the City of Ashburn Police Department or any city employee who is under the direct supervision of the Ashburn Police Chief. (Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1(Exh. A), 11-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-36. - Public comment at city council meetings. (a)  An agenda together with accompanying information shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council by the city clerk three days preceding the council meeting. This agenda, upon approval at the beginning of each meeting, shall govern the order of business for the meeting. Additions, deletions, or amendments to the approved agenda shall be made by a majority vote of the council. (b)  Following the approval of the minutes of the previous meeting, there shall be an agenda item entitled "speaker appearances." This agenda item shall contain a list of those individuals who have requested at least five days in advance of the meeting that their names be placed on the agenda. Following presentations by those on the agenda, the chairperson shall recognize those who wish to speak on a specific agenda item and have completed a speaker appearance form. (c)  Individuals who wish to appear before the council may submit a written request to the city clerk together with a statement of the topic to be addressed. Those individuals who have submitted a written request to appear before the city council prior to the meeting shall be allowed to address the council for up to ten minutes. (d)  Immediately prior to each meeting, individuals who wish to address a specific agenda item shall complete a speaker appearance form, a copy of which is attached hereto as "Exhibit A." The speaker appearance form will be provided by the city clerk or the city clerk's designee who shall be available to answer any questions regarding procedures for addressing the council. Speakers who wish to address a specific agenda item shall be given up to five minutes to make their remarks. No speakers will be allowed who did not complete a speaker appearance form before the meeting. (e)  The council may prohibit discussion of those matters that are exempt from public discussion by the Georgia Open Meetings Act. These topics may include real estate acquisitions, pending litigation, and personnel matters. Speakers may submit any concerns exempt from discussion to the council or city manager in writing. No comments or presentation regarding any pending criminal charges shall be allowed until ten days after a final judgement in the matter or until ten days after all charges have been dismissed. (f)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this policy, meetings of the Ashburn City Council are not open forums and public comments shall be limited to those matters pertaining to the operation and function of the municipal government of the City of Ashburn. Nothing in this policy shall provide any individual any right to make a presentation to the council that is irrelevant or unrelated to the city. (g)  Prior to any statement or presentation to the council, each speaker shall state his/her name and shall provide his/her address. Each speaker shall comply with the following restrictions: (1)  No person shall be allowed to make obscene, derogatory, or slanderous remarks that disrupt the orderly conduct of the meeting. (2)  No person shall disrupt the meeting or interfere in any way with the orderly conduct of the meeting. (3)  Remarks shall end when a speaker's allotted time has expired. (4)  Speakers may respond to questions from the mayor and city council, should clarification be necessary. Provided, however, no person shall be permitted to enter into discussion with the mayor or council member or any member of the city staff during the conduct of a meeting. (h)  The public comment period is designed to gain input from the public and not for immediate responses by the city council to public comments. While the city council cannot assure each speaker of a specific or individualized response, the city council will consider the public comments and any supporting materials provided by speakers. (i)  Any person who willfully violates these rules shall be prohibited from appearing before the council for a period of 60 days. The mayor shall order the removal of anyone who disrupts or interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting. (j)  Availability of agenda. Prior to any meeting of the city council, the council shall make available an agenda of all matters expected to come before the council at such meeting. The agenda shall be available upon request and shall be posted at the meeting site as far in advance of the meeting as reasonably possible, but shall not be required to be available more than two weeks prior to the meeting and shall be posted at a minimum at some time during the two-week period immediately prior to the meeting. Failure to include on the agenda an item which becomes necessary to address during the course of the meeting shall not preclude consideration of and action upon such item. (Res. No. 18-05, § 1(Exh. A), 7-5-2018) Editor's note— Exhibit A to Res. No. 18-05 is not set out herein but is available in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-37—2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sec. 2-40. - Intent.     It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Ashburn that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-41. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the city manager containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct.     Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have interest in transactions involving: (1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; (2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; (3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or (4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured.     Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any member of the city council and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-42. - Prohibitions.     No member of the governing authority shall: (1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; (2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; provided, however, prohibition under this subparagraph (2) shall not apply in the case of: a.  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; b.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; c.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; d.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law; (3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; (4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; (5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; provided, however, prohibition under this subparagraph (5) shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 20-43 hereof are made to the board or commission chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed; (6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; (7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church, or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; (8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; (9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. (10)  Use a city-owned vehicle for a purpose other than official city business. Use of city-owned vehicles shall be limited within the corporate limits between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless the city manager provides prior written authorization. State Law reference— Prohibited acts, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004; Ord. No. 18-11, 10-4-2018) 
Sec. 2-43. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest.     An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-44. - Disqualification.     A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-45. - Prohibited contracts.     The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest; provided, however, this subparagraph shall not apply in the following cases: (1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; (2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; (3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-6; (4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; (5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following disclosure. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-46. - Restrictions on contracts and employment with former members of the governing authority. (a)  The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 24-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by competitive bid or a committee selection process. (b)  The city shall not employ any person who has been within the preceding 24-month period the mayor or member of the city council. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 2-1-2007; Ord. No. 18-09, 9-6-2018) 
Sec. 2-47. - Complaints.     Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the city manager unless the complaint regards the city manager in which case it shall be filed with the mayor. Upon receipt of a complaint, the city manager (or the mayor if the complaint regards the city manager) shall appoint three members of the city council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous, or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-48. - Board of ethics. (a)  Composition of the board of ethics: (1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subparagraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. (2)  The mayor and members of council shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 12 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of the board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. (3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these ten qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the Board of Ethics have been appointed. The five-member board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. (4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. (b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: (1)  To establish procedures, rules, and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; (2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; (3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this division and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this section; (4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division; (5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this division; (6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; (7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-49. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints.     The board of ethics, appointed as herein set forth, shall cause the complaint to be served as soon as practicable on the member of the governing authority charged in such complaint. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but in all circumstances the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board shall be rendered to the mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-50. - Penalty and member rights. (a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this division shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. (b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by legal counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses, and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-51. - Appeals. (a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. (b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Turner County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. State Law reference— Writ of certiorari, O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. (Ord. No. 04-05, § 1, 5-6-2004) 
Sec. 2-52. - [Ethics principles.]     The governing authority subscribes to the following ethics principles and pledges to conduct its affairs accordingly: • Serve others, not ourselves; • Use resources with efficiency and economy; • Treat all people fairly; • Use the power of our position for the well-being of our constituents; • Create an environment of honesty, openness and integrity. (Res. No. 2017-01, 3-2-2017) Editor's note— Res. No. 2017-01, adopted March 2, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-52 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-53—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— The city complies [compiles] and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual includes regulations and standing operating procedures pertaining to operation of the departments created in section 2-1. The retirement plan for city employees as established by an ordinance adopted November 7, 1974, is administered by the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. Official copies of the referenced documentation are on file in the office of the city clerk. Charter reference— City manager, § 2.30. Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salaries if any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); emergency management, § 30-31 et seq. State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq.; Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-61. - Reports and accountings.     All officers shall make quarterly financial reports to the city council, in writing, of all sums of money or other property received by them, and all sums paid out by them. They shall also report all charges that occur in connection with their office, in favor of, or against the city. They shall make quarterly reports in writing to the city council of their actions, and pay over all moneys or other things received by them to proper officers. On failure of any officer to comply with this section, he shall be liable to be dealt with for malfeasance in office. (Code 1983, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-62. - Volunteer firefighters.     The city's volunteer firefighters are to be included within the definition of "employee" under O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1(2) for the purposes of worker's compensation coverage. Cross reference— Fire department, § 42-31 et seq. 
Sec. 2-63. - Salary increases.     Salary increases for any employee of the city shall be set by the city council. However, the city manager shall have the authority to recommend salary increases to the city council for their approval. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 2-64. - [Minimum wage.]     The minimum wage to be paid to all full-time employees in the City of Ashburn is $11.00. Said wage may be reviewed and modified by the council from time to time. (Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, 4-7-2016) Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-02, § 1, adopted April 7, 2016, enacted new provisions designated as § 2-63. Inasmuch as § 2-63 already exists, said section has been renumbered as § 2-64 at the discretion of the editor. Note— This wage shall be applicable to all full-time employees for the pay period beginning May 1, 2016. 
Secs. 2-65—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE DRUG TESTING 
Sec. 2-81. - Findings. (a)  The city intends to hire employees who can provide efficient and effective service to the citizens of the city. (b)  After careful thought and consideration, the city council has determined that it is necessary to take a strong position in opposition to drug use. (c)  Drug use on the job endangers the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and city employees. (d)  The city desires to be a drug-free workplace and intends to implement a drug policy and drug testing program. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-82. - Policy. (a)  Purpose. (1)  The city is concerned for the well-being of all city employees. That concern has led the city to take a strong stand on drug abuse. There is ample evidence that drug use is bad for employee performance. Simply stated, drugs have no place in the city's employ. (2)  The city believes it has a responsibility to provide a safe, healthy, and productive working environment for all city employees. To accomplish this goal the city must rely on a close manager/employee relationship to surface problems. (3)  The city endorses efforts to devise high quality standards for drug testing. Such standards will reassure the public and city employees and help reinforce overall the quality of drug testing which impacts the city's ongoing program to address the problems of drug use in the workplace. (4)  The United States Congress has enacted the Drug-Free Work Place Act of 1988. The purpose of this law is to ensure that work done under federal contract or federal grants is performed in a drug-free environment. (5)  Drug abuse and use at the workplace are subjects of immediate concern in society. From a safety perspective, users may impair the well-being of all employees, the public at large, and result in damage to city property. Therefore, in addition to prohibiting employees from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of illegal drugs in the workplace, the city prohibits its employees from engaging in such illegal activities at all times and at all places. Such activities, even during nonworking hours, clearly affect an employee's ability to perform his or her public duties. (b)  Conditions. The city adopts the following as its drug free policy: (1)  No employee of this city may illegally engage in the manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance at any time or place, including while at his or her workplace. Such unlawful activity will be considered sufficient grounds for an adverse personnel action, up to and including dismissal from employment. (2)  Any employee who gives or in any way transfers a controlled substance to another person or sells or manufactures a controlled substance while on or off the job will be subject to discipline up to and including termination. (3)  The term "controlled substance" means any drug listed in 21 USC 812 and other federal regulations. Generally, these are drugs which have a high potential for abuse. They also include legal drugs which are not prescribed by a licensed physician. Drugs that are legally prescribed but are being abused are also included. (4)  Each employee is required to inform his or her department head within five days after he or she is arrested or convicted for violation of any criminal drug statute of any jurisdiction, regardless of whether the alleged violation occurred at the workplace or elsewhere. The employee must notify his or her department head and the city manager, in writing, of each conviction. A conviction means a finding of guilt, including a plea of nolo contendere, or the imposition of a sentence by a judge or jury in any federal or state court. (5)  Failure to comply with any part of this policy will result in serious adverse personnel action, including possible dismissal from employment. (6)  Any questions that any employee may have concerning this policy should be directed to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-83. - Abuse prohibited; right to test. (a)  Drug and alcohol abuse by city employees is prohibited. This shall include the use of illegal substances, the abuses of prescription medications, and the use or abuse of alcohol during and immediately preceding work hours or while on city premises. (b)  The city reserves the right to test any and all applicants as potential employees of the city. The determination of the positions to be tested are clearly stated in the policy and program description. Exceptions require the concurrence of the city council. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-84. - Preemployment screening. (a)  The following provisions apply to applicants considered for employment with the city: (1)  Applicants considered for employment or rehire will be screened for drugs as a routine part of the preemployment physical for specified job classes. Employees who are being considered for reinstatement or who are rehired must also receive a drug test prior to return to work after appeal or assuming new duties. (2)  Applicants will be requested to sign a consent release form authorizing the designated lab to perform the drug screening and submit the results to the city manager. (3)  Applicants who refuse to sign the consent release form or who show traces of illegal drugs will not be considered for employment for a period of six months. Applicants who subsequently reapply for employment after the six-month period will again be requested to sign a consent release form and be required to pass a drug screening test that shows no signs of illegal drugs or abuse of prescribed drugs. (4)  Applicants shall be given only one valid drug screening review within a six-month period. If the first test shows positive, the applicant may elect to pay for a confirmation test. (b)  Any employee who has been arrested for a drug or alcohol violation may be required to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test. Failure of an employee to report the arrest shall be deemed a violation of this policy and shall subject the employee to immediate disciplinary action, which may include termination of employment. (c)  Whenever an employee takes a physical exam in relation to his or her employment, continued employment, or return to work following an absence for six weeks or longer, he or she shall be tested for drugs and/or alcohol. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-85. - Procedures. (a)  Employees who are requested to submit to a drug or alcohol test will be asked to sign a consent release from authorizing the laboratory, physician, or certified intoximeter operator to perform the test and release the results to the city manager. An employee will fill out a form listing any and all drugs he or she has been prescribed and any other over-the-counter drugs he or she is taking. All results of these tests will be held in the strictest confidence by the city manager. (b)  Employees who refuse to sign a consent release form or who are identified as having prohibited substances in their system may be disciplined up to and including termination of employment. Any employee tested under this section will be suspended with pay for up to five days pending the results of the tests. (c)  All samples of body fluids provided in compliance with this policy shall be used only to test for the presence of drugs or alcohol. (d)  For employees placed on probation following a prior positive drug test, the testing will take place without prior notice at irregular intervals throughout the term of the employee's probation. This testing will in no event be more frequent than twice in any calendar month. Probationary testings shall be directed by the city manager, who shall determine the dates of the probationary test and shall inform the employee when to report for testing. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-86. - Disciplinary actions. (a)  The following employment actions apply when an applicant or employee tests positive pursuant to this division: (1)  Applicants. Applicants testing positive shall not be employed at the time. Applicants who are denied employment for this reason may reapply for employment after six months from the date of the positive drug test. (2)  Employees. Employees testing positive shall be subject to one or more of the following employment actions: suspension without pay and/or termination of employment and/or mandatory participation in a drug or alcohol rehabilitation program. All employees not terminated following a positive test shall be placed on probation for one year following the date of testing. All positive results from a drug test will be verified by a confirmation test using the GCMS test. (b)  Any personnel action taken under this drug testing policy shall be reviewed by the city council and with the advice and counsel of the city attorney at the option of the city manager. (c)  Failure to comply with any part of the city drug testing program will result in serious adverse personnel action, including possible dismissal from employment. (d)  Termination will be automatic in the following cases: (1)  Selling drugs on or off the job. (2)  A positive drug test while on probation under the city drug testing policy. (3)  Nolo plea, guilty plea, or conviction of a second DUI offense. (4)  DUI while operating a city vehicle. (5)  Two misdemeanor violations (nolo, guilty plea, or conviction) of the controlled substance laws within a three-year period. (6)  Felony violations of drug laws. (e)  While dismissal from employment will occur in most cases, the following factors must be considered prior to taking any personnel action. Strong, mitigating circumstances may provide an opportunity for disciplinary action other than dismissal. The following guidelines shall apply: (1)  Public safety personnel will be held to a higher standard. (2)  Position within the department (supervisory personnel will be held to a higher standard). (3)  Gravity of liability and workers' compensation exposure to city. (4)  Prior violations of drug or alcohol laws. (5)  Prior violations of the city drug policy. (6)  Any other occurrences where the circumstances indicate disciplinary actions may be required. (f)  Failure to appear at the designated collection site when directed or other failure to take the test shall subject the employee or applicant to the same sanctions as if the test had been positive. Supervisors must notify the city manager immediately when an employee fails to show for drug testing. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-87. - Management and supervisory guidelines.     The guidelines in this section are for use by managers and supervisors at all levels and in all departments. They are intended to provide assistance in the administration of the drug testing program. (1)  The city encourages any employee who has a drug or alcohol problem to obtain assistance. Therefore, if such an employee has not been required to submit to a drug or alcohol test or has tested negative but in good faith requires assistance for his or her problem, the employee shall be referred to a treatment and counseling program. This voluntary admission shall not be used against the employee. (2)  Each supervisor is responsible for taking appropriate action whenever an employee's demonstrated judgment or performance seems to be impaired by the possible use of alcohol or drugs. a.  Supervisors who suspect that an employee is unfit for duty should arrange, if practical, for at least one supervisor to observe and evaluate the employee's behavior. The employee's supervisor should ask the employee to explain why he or she appears unable to perform the job duties. b.  Should the employee fail to explain the impaired condition to the supervisor's satisfaction and it is still the supervisor's determination that drugs or alcohol may be involved, the supervisor may, upon consultation with designated senior staff/management, accompany the employee or make necessary arrangements for the employee to be taken by another supervisor to the designated lab, physician, or certified intoximeter operator for testing. c.  If the employee refuses to go, the employee should be warned that he or she will be held accountable for unfit behavior. Additionally, the employee would be disciplined for insubordination. Depending upon the employee's condition, the employee should be taken home and told when to report back to work. The supervisor should exercise caution in committing to any specific disciplinary action prior to consultation with the department head and staff. (3)  Supervisors will document in writing all incidents, investigations, and actions regarding suspected drug or alcohol abuse. If disciplinary action occurs, a full report by the department head/director should be sent to the city manager. (4)  When a supervisor observes the manufacture, use, sale, dissemination, or possession of illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages by employees on the job, the supervisor should take the following steps: a.  Call the sheriff. b.  Separate all parties involved and take them to a location where they can be questioned by the sheriff department's personnel about the incident, in the presence of another supervisor. c.  Report the incident to the immediate supervisor. d.  Upon completing the pending investigation, take the employee home, if necessary. Following any incident that might fall under these guidelines, it is essential that the immediate supervisor make a detailed record of all actions, observations, statements, and other pertinent facts, to include date, time, location, and witnesses to the incident. The supervisor should not record his or her opinion or conclusion (i.e., the employee appeared to be on drugs) but rather the supervisor should simply state his or her observations (i.e., the employee was hyperactive, argumentative, loud, obnoxious, sweating profusely, pupils were constricted, etc.). This report shall be forwarded to the city manager. (5)  If an employee has been arrested for a drug-related or alcohol-related offense while off duty, the employee will be required to report the arrest promptly to his or her immediate supervisor. Management should investigate the nature of the offense to determine if disciplinary action is necessary. (6)  If a supervisor reviews a report and finds that an employee has violated the city's drugs and alcohol abuse policy, the supervisor shall document all available information regarding the incident and shall forward it to the city manager. Documentation shall include, but is not limited to: a.  Suspected employee's full name. b.  Times of observed drug or alcohol usage. c.  Frequency of use, if appropriate (i.e., occasionally, in the parking lot after work). d.  Specific locations of use, such as in a specific house or car. e.  Other participants or witnesses. f.  Any unusual behavior that would indicate that the observed individual was intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled substance. (7)  The employees of the city police department, covered employees as defined by the Department of Transportation, 49 CFR 192, 193, or 195, any other person operating hazardous machinery, or anyone operating a vehicle in his or her official capacity shall be subject to additional rules and policies related to drug and alcohol testing, consistent with the general purposes of these rules and attached to Ordinance No. 00-05 and made a part of this antidrug program policies and procedures adopted August 21, 1990, and revised August 1999. Additional rules for certain employees are implemented due to the high levels of employee performance required, the public interest, and visibility of the employees, and responsibility for the protection of life and property. Additional rules and policies shall include unannounced random drug testing, including temporary employees in this category, to determine the presence of prohibited drugs. (8)  Records of all drugs/alcohol test analyses, observation records of supervisors, and any other administrative reports relating to drug and/or alcohol use or abuse by an individual employee shall be maintained in a separate locked file available only to the city manager or to the city manager's designee, or to any persons who have an official need-to-know basis for requesting these documents. This information shall not be released to any outside person, agency, or department. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-88. - Guidelines for testing procedures.     All testing procedures under this division will be administered and accounted for by an approved laboratory and/or medical facility that is operating in compliance within the National Institute of Drug Abuse guidelines. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Sec. 2-89. - Mayor and city council.     The mayor and members of the city council shall be subject to the city drug testing program; provided, however, compliance by the mayor and members of the council shall be voluntary, and failure to comply with the provisions of this policy shall carry no penalty. (Ord. No. 00-05, § 1, 8-3-2000) 
Secs. 2-90—2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Editor's note— The city has compiled and published separately its purchasing policies and procedures, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(14). State Law reference— Discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-111. - Fiscal year.     The city's fiscal year shall commence on July 1 and conclude on June 30 of the following year. State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 2-112—2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET 
Sec. 2-131. - Budget—Procedures for adoption.     The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended, and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The procedure shall be as follows: (1)  Introduction. On the date established by the city, the proposed budget shall be submitted to the city council for review prior to enactment of the budget ordinance. (2)  Public examination. On the date that the proposed budget is submitted to the city council for consideration, a copy of the budget shall be placed in city hall during reasonable business hours in order to afford the public every opportunity to review the budget prior to adoption by the council. (3)  Public advertisement. A statement advising the residents of the city of the availability of the proposed budget shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall be published during the week in which the proposed budget is submitted to the governing authority. In addition, the statement shall also advise the residents that a public hearing will be held at which time any person wishing to be heard on the budget may appear. The hearing shall be conducted at least one week prior to the meeting at which the budget is to be adopted. The city shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing. The notice required by this paragraph may be included in the statement published pursuant to this paragraph. (4)  Adoption. The municipal budget shall be adopted prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. Upon adoption, the budget shall constitute an appropriation for the purposes stated therein and an authorization of the amount to be raised by taxation for the purposes of the city. State Law reference— O.C.G.A. §§ 36-81-5 and 36-81-6. 
Sec. 2-132. - Same—Message.     When introduced to the city council for approval, the municipal budget shall be accompanied by a budget message which shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. The budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for each change, summarize the city's debt position, and include such other materials as will provide a complete synopsis of the financial condition of the city. 
Sec. 2-133. - Same—Form and content. (a)  The municipal budget shall be prefaced by a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the current fiscal year and actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: (1)  Administration, operation, and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown for salaries and wages for each such units; (2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; (3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; (4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; (5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount for administration, operation, and maintenance expenses; (6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the City Council. (b)  The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
Sec. 2-134. - Capital program. (a)  A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the same time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: (1)  A clear general summary of its contents; (2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; (3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and (4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. (b)  The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
Sec. 2-135. - Emergency appropriations.     The city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues. 
Sec. 2-136. - Transfer of appropriations.     The mayor may at any time during the fiscal year transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the city council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year. 
Sec. 2-137. - Lapse of appropriations.     Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Sec. 2-138. - Publication of financial statement.     Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures that fairly represents the financial condition of the city and that shows all municipal accounts as of the close of such preceding fiscal year shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
Sec. 2-139. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned, or impounded property. (a)  All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where such property has been stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown shall be held for a period of 30 days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of such property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to such person. (b)  If after the expiration of 30 days the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall advertise the property for sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed. Such advertising shall take place at least 30 days before the date set for the sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time for the sale, it shall be sold as advertised, and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. 
Sec. 2-140. - Definition.     For the purposes of this article, any emergency is defined as being a situation where immediate action is absolutely necessary and delay would adversely affect the life, health, or safety of the citizens or the property of the city. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-141. - General restriction. (a)  No officer or employee of the city shall purchase for or on behalf of the city or his/her office any materials, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment of any kind or character except through the approval of the city council or as provided in section 2-142. No voucher check or other method of payment shall be honored if this method is not followed. (b)  It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the city to make any purchase or aid and abet the making of any purchase by any other manner than through the city council or as provided in section 2-142. (c)  It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer of the city to make any purchase or donation or to aid and abet the making of any purchase or donation that exceeds the allotted amount set forth in the budget, except as provided for emergency purchases. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-142. - Authority of city manager. (a)  The City Manager of the City of Ashburn shall be authorized to spend up to $10,000.00 for any materials, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, services or equipment without approval from the city council provided the same is a budgeted item. Any purchases over $10,000.00 shall require the approval of the city council except in an emergency situation as herein after provided. (b)  The city manager shall not make a purchase under this article that exceeds the amount budgeted unless the purchase is for an emergency. If a purchase or expenditure must be made that will exceed the budget amount, the city manager shall request the city council to amend the budget to cover such expenditure. No purchase order may be released or liability incurred prior to the approval of the amended budget by the city council. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-143. - Penalty for violation.     Any officer or employee of the city who spends or creates financial liability beyond the budgeted amount on behalf of the city shall be in violation and will be personally liable for the expenditure or liability beyond the budgeted amount. Furthermore, a violation of any provision of this article shall be determined a violation of the city personnel policy and shall be deemed sufficient grounds for discharge. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-144. - Handling of invoices.     All invoices shall be turned in on a daily basis and shall be attached to the purchase orders. All such invoices shall be submitted to the city clerk or to his/her designated agent. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-145. - Purchase orders required. (a)  No officer or employee of the city shall request any merchant, dealer, or other vendor to deliver goods to the city or any department or officer or employee thereof, except on a regular purchase order approved by the city council or city manager. (b)  Any purchases made without obtaining a purchase order in advance shall be disallowed and payment refused. No purchase order will be issued after the fact. Vendors, merchants, and dealers will be deemed to have dealt with any employee or officer who does not have a purchase order at their own risk. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-146. - Emergency purchases.     In all cases where there is an immediate need for any materials, supplies, goods, wares, or merchandise by any department, such department must advise the city manager, and if he/she cannot be located, the officer or employee must immediately notify the mayor. In the event that neither of the above individuals can be reached and an emergency purchase of the item is absolutely necessary, such purchase must be reported to the city manager within 24 hours of such purchase. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-147. - Discretion on purchases.     In all purchases where quality, as well as price and service, is involved, the city manager shall exercise discretion in making the purchase. In all cases where patented items or special purpose items are requested, the city manager has the discretionary authority to decide whether similar products of equal quality and at a lower price shall be ordered in lieu of items requested. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Sec. 2-148. - Purchasing and procurement. (a)  Purchases and procurement of supplies, fixed assets, and services, shall be classified as follows: (1)  Purchases which total less than $500.00 in the aggregate annually. (2)  Purchases which total less than $3,000.00 in the aggregate annually. (3)  Purchases which total less than $10,000.00 in the aggregate annually. (4)  Purchases which total more than $25,000.00 in the aggregate annually. (b)  Purchases totaling less than $500.00. Purchases totaling less than $500.00 may be authorized by the city manager when he/she has reasonable assurances that the price to be paid is fair and equitable and further quotes will not provide a reasonable savings. Consideration shall be given to costs of personnel time, delivery, etc. when making such decisions and when such items do not exceed the aggregate total in the approved annual budget. (c)  Purchases totaling more than $500.00 but less than $2,500.00. Purchases totaling more than $500.00 but less than $2,500.00 may be authorized by the city manager following documentation of evidence the purchase has been properly researched to find the best price for a competitive price and evidence that the purchase is being conducted reasonably and fairly. Telephone quotes may be sufficient documentation if supporting catalogs, flyers or other written materials are available. Quotes may also be faxed from local suppliers or some purchases may require written specification sheets and a formal quote to be adequate documentation. Other cases may require written specification sheets and quote for an adequate response. (d)  Purchases totaling more than $2,500.00 but less than $10,000.00. Purchases totaling more than $2,500.00 but less than $10,000.00 shall require a minimum of three written quotes in response to requests submitted to qualified suppliers. Quotes from all qualified suppliers in the region should be requested when possible. The city must be able to document fairness and equity in purchases and all items purchased by the city shall not exceed the aggregate total allotted in the approved annual budget. (e)  Purchases of more than $10,000.00. Purchases of more than $10,000.00 shall require a minimum of three formal proposals, in response to detailed specifications prepared by the City of Ashburn. No purchase shall be made without the documentation of three formal proposals or comprehensive documentation of the fact that only one or two suppliers chose to respond to the request. In such cases where fewer than three formal proposals are received, the city manager should contact other local government organizations who have engaged in similar projects to determine if the proposals received are reasonable and valid. (f)  Purchases of more than $25,000.00. Purchases of more than $25,000.00 shall require a formal bidding process determined by the city manager and approved by the City Council of Ashburn. The process shall include at a minimum: the formal advertisement of specifications being available, formal requests of known suppliers of goods or services required, stringent published deadlines for submittal, published public meeting for the opening of proposals, documentation of references for firms, and acceptance of a proposal with no substitutions. (g)  Purchases which can be made through the state contract shall be assumed to be in compliance with the above guidelines and may not require any further proposals. Discretion shall be used by the city manager in the decision to utilize state contract as the procurement source for the city, making certain a good or service may not be purchased from a lower cost responsible bidder. (h)  Splitting a purchase to avoid the procurement guidelines is strictly prohibited and a cause for action against an employee under the personnel policies. Changes to contracts or purchase orders should be subjected to the same controls and approvals as the original agreement. Claims shall be made by the city against vendors regarding documented shortages, or substitutions of lesser quality. (Ord. No. 15-07, § 1(Exh. A), 8-6-2016) 
Secs. 2-149—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL BONDS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— General procedures and requirements for local bonded debts, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1; O.C.G.A. § 36-38-1. 
Sec. 2-161. - Adoption of state rules and regulations.     The rules, regulations, and provisions contained in O.C.G.A. Chapters 36—38 and 36—82 relating to debts of municipalities, counties, and other political subdivisions are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions governing the issuance of general obligation and revenue bonds by this city. 
Sec. 2-162. - Preliminary review by finance committee.     Prior to any issue of bonds by the city, the proposal for such issue shall be referred to the standing finance committee which committee shall give careful consideration to the proposal and submit a recommendation to the city council for approval of disapproval, with applicable reasons therefor. 
Sec. 2-163. - Records to be kept.     A complete description of each bond issued by the city shall be kept by the city clerk in a suitable book, which book shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 2-164. - Registration—Application for registration.     Any holder of a bond issued by the city may register such bond as to principal and interest or as to principal only by making written application for such registration to the city clerk and presenting the bond desired to be registered. Each application shall state: (1) the number of bonds presented, (2) of what issue, (3) the date, (4) the amount, (5) when due, and (6) to what extent the bonds are to be registered. Each application shall be signed by the applicant who, if holding the bonds in any capacity other than for such person's self, shall sign the application in the name of the property for whose benefit such person holds the bonds, state the capacity in which such person signs, and attach proof of such capacity. 
Sec. 2-165. - Same—Bond register.     A bond register shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk in which, upon written application and presentation of the bond by the holder thereof as hereinabove provided, shall be entered a description of each bond so presented, which description shall state: (1) the bond number, (2) the nature of the issue, (3) the face amount, (4) the date issued, (5) the date of maturity, (6) the rate and due dates of interest, (7) whether the bond is registered as to principal and interest or as to principal only, (8) the name and mailing address of the bond holder, (9) the name of the person registering the bond, and (10) the capacity in which such person registered the bond. All bonds registered in compliance with this section shall be nonnegotiable to the extent registered. 
Sec. 2-166. - Same—Statement of registration and form.     Upon registration of any bonds as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall stamp, print, or write upon each bond so registered a statement of the registration in substantially the following form, inserting in the blanks the matter applicable to each transaction: "Registered by ____________ . Nonnegotiable. Principal [and interest] to be paid only to ____________ located at ____________ or to such person's legal representative located at ____________ . This ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . City of Ashburn       City Clerk   
Sec. 2-167. - Same—Procedure for transfer after registration.     In order to transfer any bond which may have been registered under the provisions hereof, the holder thereof shall present the same to the city clerk and shall authorize such transfer, in writing, giving the name of the transferee, the number of the bond, of what issue, and the dates of issue and maturity. Such authority shall be signed and acknowledged in the presence of a notary public or some other officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and such notary public or other officer shall certify, in writing and under seal of the office, that such authority was signed and acknowledged in such officer's presence. In addition to giving such written authority, the holder shall enter a statement of the transfer on the face of each bond, properly dated, and signed. Thereupon the city clerk shall enter the transfer of each bond opposite the original entry of registration in the bond register, giving the name of the transferee and date of the transfer, and shall enter the same on each bond over such person's official signature. The transferee may thereafter, in the manner herein prescribed, also transfer such bond. 
Sec. 2-168. - Disposition of bonds and coupons.     Whenever the city clerk pays any bond or coupon of the city, such clerk shall forthwith stamp, print, or write upon such bond or coupon the word "PAID" and shall notify the standing finance committee that such clerk has in hand such canceled paper, whereupon the finance committee shall take possession of the same after giving the clerk a receipt for the bonds and coupons. Such bonds and coupons shall thereafter be destroyed by the finance committee in the presence of the city clerk, who shall then make an entry to that effect on the receipt given to such clerk. 
Sec. 2-169. - Sinking fund—Establishment.     All taxes collected for the payment of principal and interest on city general obligation bonds shall be kept by the city treasurer as a separate fund to be known as the "sinking fund." Under no circumstances shall such fund be paid out by the city treasurer for any other purpose than for the payment of the interest and principal on the bonds for which it was collected or for the purpose of investment as provided by law and city ordinance. 
Sec. 2-170. - Same—Certification of amount.     Prior to adoption of the annual budget, the amount to be included in the sinking fund for the prospective fiscal year shall be certified by the municipal auditor as an amount sufficient to pay all principal and interest coming due in such fiscal year, and the sinking fund as certified shall be included in the annual budget. 
Sec. 2-171. - Same—Investment.     It shall be the duty of the city treasurer promptly to make arrangements for the investment of the sinking fund in the manner provided by law and, upon approval of such arrangements by the city council, promptly to make such investment. 
DIVISION 4. - PURCHASING CARDS 
Sec. 2-172. - Credit card and purchasing card policy.     The city has adopted a policy regarding government credit card or/and purchasing card usage. Any employee or official who uses or possesses a government credit card should abide by the terms of this policy when using the government credit card for purchases. CREDIT CARD AND PURCHASING CARD POLICY A.  Purpose . The purpose of this policy is to set requirements and standards for the City of Ashburn's Government Credit Card and/or Purchasing Card. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia statutes but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city issued purchasing card or credit card be used for personal purchases regardless of the circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution. All purchases made utilizing a government purchasing card or government credit card must be in accordance with these guidelines and with state law. B.  Scope . This purchasing card policy, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of government purchasing cards or government credit cards used by authorized elected officials and employees. The below list of officials have been authorized by the government authority of the City to use such government purchasing cards or government credit cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy. 1.  Mayor 2.  Clerk 3.  City Manager 4.  Police Chief 5.  Fire Chief 6.  Head of Public Works Department 7.  Heads of Utility Departments 8.  Council Members C.  Public Inspection . In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b) any documents or other records related to purchases made using government purchasing cards or government credit cards incurred by elected officials shall be available for public inspection. D.  Transaction Limits . Transaction limits are hereby established to insure compliance with state purchasing laws, maintain proper budgetary controls, and to minimize excessive use of any individual credit line. Individual monthly card limits cannot exceed those established by the municipal governing authority. The established single transaction limit for each card must be less than $2,000.00. The established monthly card limit is based upon the city's budgetary constraints and is not to exceed $10,000 per month. Any exceptions to the standardized limits must have express written approval by the municipal governing authority and must be added to this policy by amendment or addendum. E.  Purchasing Restrictions . 1.  Elected Officials may not use a government purchasing card or government credit card for the following: a.  Any purchases of items for personal use. b.  Cash refunds or advances. c.  Any transaction amount greater than the transaction limits set for by this policy. d.  Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is granted by the municipal governing authority. e.  Alcohol or liquor of any kind. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the City. f.  Purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent the City purchasing policy, transactional limits, or state law. g.  Food, fuel or non-alcoholic beverages. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the City. 2.  Elected Officials may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: a.  Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. b.  Purchase of lodging, education and training materials while on city business. c.  Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property.     Notwithstanding the above, the City prefers payment of expenses by check. F.  Training and Travel Expenses . 1.  Officials may use the City card to pay transportation costs for to and from training approved by the Mayor and Council. This includes but is not limited to any airline reservations, gas purchases, taxi fees, baggage handling fees, and parking fees. 2.  Lodging. The credit card may also be used to pay reasonable lodging accommodations while on official travel. Copies of hotel or motel receipts shall be returned to the City. 3.  Meals. The City card may be used to purchase meals while on official travel at a maximum rate of up to of $150.00 per day for all meals. At no time should the City card be used for the purchase of alcohol. G.  Administrator . The City designates the City Clerk as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: 1.  Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards. 2.  Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders. 3.  Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders. 4.  Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information. 5.  Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information. 6.  Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. 7.  Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy. 8.  Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs, and approvals required under this policy. 9.  Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing card or government credit card. 10.  Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority. H.  Accounting and Auditing . The Administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with City policy and state law, will conduct quarterly reviews and audits of all government purchasing card or government credit card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify non-compliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures, assist the city with improving compliance. The quarterly review and audit should happen within 30 (thirty) days of the start of a new quarter. After completing the quarterly audit the Administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the Administrator has relating to spending within that quarter. Depending on the severity of the violation, the Administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card after notification to the cardholder and to the municipal governing authority, but only after consultation with the City attorney. Any unresolved violations should be reported of the municipal governing authority and the City attorney in writing within 10 (ten) business days. I.  Violations . The use of a government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the Administrator, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that the cardholder has violated the approved policies or state law regarding the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever a cardholder is removed from office with the City and shall be suspended if such elected official has been suspended from office.     Misuse of a government purchasing card or government credit card may result in the loss of employment or referral to appropriate law enforcement officers. J.  Agreement . Before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized users of government purchasing cards, or government credit cards shall sign and accept below indicating that such user will use such cards only in accordance with the polices of the City and with the requirements of state law.     The City has adopted a policy regarding government credit card or/and purchasing usage. Any employee of official who uses or possesses a government credit card should abide by the terms of this policy when using the government credit card for purchases. _____Name Printed _____Signature Title: _____ Date: _____  (Ord. No. 2015-11, § 1, 12-3-2015) 
Secs. 2-173—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-201—2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ASHBURN COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-01, §§ 1—5, adopted March 3, 2005, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions as §§ 2-231—2-235 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-231. - [Commission established.]     There is hereby established in and for the City of Ashburn the Ashburn Community Relations Commission to be composed of seven members who shall be residents of the City of Ashburn and registered voters of the City of Ashburn, one of whom shall be appointed by each of the five Council members and two of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Ashburn. Emphasis in the selection of commission members shall be upon obtaining a group diverse with respect to race, religion, economic status, type of employment, age, national origin, sex, geographic location, and political party affiliation. The five members appointed by the council members shall be appointed to initial terms of two years each and until their successors are appointed and qualified, and the two members appointed by the mayor shall be appointed for initial terms of one year each and until their successors are appointed and qualified. After initial appointments have been served, terms shall be two years each in duration and until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 3-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-232. - [Chairman; appointment.]     The Chairman of the Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall be appointed by the mayor annually from the members of the community relations commission, said chairman to serve for one calendar year or until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. The Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall appoint such additional officers as it shall deem appropriate and necessary. (Ord. No. 05-01, § 2, 3-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-233. - [Duties, powers, functions.]     The Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall have the following duties, powers, and functions: (1)  To encourage, promote, and develop fair and equal treatment and opportunity for all persons regardless of race, color, creed, sex, or national origin; (2)  To coordinate and assist local governmental agencies on human relations in their efforts to promote better relations; (3)  To cooperate with community, professional, civic, and religious organizations and federal, state, county, and municipal agencies in the development of public information programs, leadership, and activities in the interest of equal opportunity and treatment of all racial, religious, and ethnic groups; (4)  To conduct research projects and studies and to make reports on race relations in the city; (5)  To annually and periodically report to the mayor and city council of the city on the activities of the Ashburn Community Relations Commission; (6)  To adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to govern the proceedings of the Ashburn Community Relations Commission and to conduct all meetings in accordance with said rules and regulations; (7)  To investigate, study, and inform the public as to any complaints received concerning the above areas; (8)  [ Reserved. ] (Ord. No. 05-01, § 3, 3-3-2005; Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 2-234. - [Compensation.]     No member of the Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall receive any compensation for his or her activities as a member of said body. The Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall submit an annual budgetary request to the governing authority of the city for approval. The governing authority of the city is hereby authorized to appropriate funds for use by the Ashburn Community Relations Commission, as provided herein. (Ord. No. 05-01, § 4, 3-3-2005) 
Sec. 2-235. - [Vacancies.]     The absence of any member from three consecutive meetings of the Ashburn Community Relations Commission shall automatically create a vacancy, which shall be filled by the mayor if the mayor appointed such member who was absent for three consecutive meetings. Should the commission member who was absent for three consecutive meetings be appointed by a council member, the commission member shall be replaced by appointment by the same council member making the original appointment of the vacating member. All appointments shall be for the unexpired term of the member whose absences created the vacancy. (Ord. No. 05-01, § 5, 3-3-2005) 
Secs. 2-236—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-251—2-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND ANIMAL CONTROL[7] Footnotes: --- (7) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-03, §§ 1-3, adopted May 5, 2005, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, inclusion of said ordinance provisions was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-276. - [Department created.]     The Department of Environmental Compliance and Animal Control is created pursuant to authority granted in the City Charter of the City of Ashburn section 1.13(p). (Ord. No. 05-03, § 1, 5-5-2005) 
Sec. 2-277. - [Department head to be recommended.]     Pursuant to Section 2.33(1) of the City Charter of the City of Ashburn, the city manager is instructed to recommend for approval by the city council a department head for the Department of Environmental Compliance and Animal Control. (Ord. No. 05-03, § 2, 5-5-2005) 
Sec. 2-278. - [Duties.]     The department head shall enforce and carry out the provisions of the City of Ashburn Property Maintenance Ordinance, Animal Control Ordinance, and Business and Occupation Tax Ordinance, all as amended from time to time, and shall enforce and carry out the provisions of such other ordinances and resolutions adopted by the mayor and city council when enforcement of such ordinance or resolution is vested in the Department of Environmental Compliance and Animal Control. The department head and employees of the department shall carry out any additional duties as assigned by the city manager. (Ord. No. 05-03, § 3, 5-5-2005) 
Sec. 2-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 2-280. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-281. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to comply with the Federal Fair And Accurate Credit Transactions Act and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto (16 CFR § 681.2) in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-282. - Definitions.     For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply     City means the City of Ashburn.     Covered account means an account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.     Credit means the right granted by the city to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore.     Customer means a person who has a covered account with the city.     Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority.     Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association.     Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth.     Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft.     Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city.     SSN means the Social Security Number. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-283. - Findings.     It is hereby found and declared by the mayor and council that: (1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision for maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. (2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, gas/propane, and solid waste. (3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: none. (4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. (5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. (6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; c.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-284. - Process of establishing a covered account. (a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, including a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account, and any other information or documentation necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. (b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-285. - Access to covered account information. (a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. (b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. (c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city clerk and the password changed immediately. (d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-286. - Credit card payments. (a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. (b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. (c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-287. - Sources and types of red flags.     All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: (1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. (2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. (3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. (4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. (5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-288. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. (a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: (1)  Contact the customer; (2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or b.  Close the account; (3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; (4)  Notify the debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; (5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or (6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city clerk, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city clerk in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city clerk: (1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; (2)  Deny the application for the new account; (3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or (4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-289. - Updating the program.     The mayor and council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by them, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: (1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; (2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; (3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; (4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and (5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-290. - Program administration.     The city clerk shall be responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city clerk is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city clerk to address changing identity theft risks and to identity new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and council for consideration by them. (1)  The city clerk will report to the mayor and council at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; b.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and c.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. (2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-291. - Outside service providers.     In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
DIVISION 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
Sec. 2-292. - Short title.     This division shall be known and referred to as "Treatment of Address Discrepancies." (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-293. - Purpose.     Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this division is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-294. - Definitions.     For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply:     Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer.     City means City of Ashburn. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-295. - Policy.     In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: (1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or (2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-296. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. (a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: (1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; (2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and (3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. (b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-297. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses.     The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: (1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; (2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; (3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or (4)  Using other reasonable processes. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-298. - Nonwaiver of immunity.     This article is not intended to be and shall not be construed to be a waiver of the governmental immunity of the city, or the official immunity or any other immunity of the city or any of its agents or employees. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-299. - Incoporation of preamble of the ordinance from which this article derives.     The preamble to the ordinance from which this article derives is hereby incorporated into this article as if set out fully herein. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-300. - Repeal of conficting ordinances.     All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Sec. 2-301. - Effective date.     This article shall become effective on May 9, 2009. (Ord. No. 08-13, 11-6-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-07, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 6, 2012, repealed the Ch. 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-10, 6-20—6-23, 6-30—6-39, 6-50—6-70, 6-80—6-85, 6-90, 6-91, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 02-09, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 5, 2002; Ord. No. 05-05, adopted June 2, 2005; Ord. No. 08-02, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 15, 2008; Ord. No. 08-14, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2008; Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2008; Ord. No. 09-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2009; Ord. No. 09-10, §;s 1, 2, adopted Dec. 3, 2009; Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2011; Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2011. Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or, fortified wine.     Bar means any establishment (by whatever name it may be known including but not limited to bar, barroom, club, juke joint, honky-tonk, nightclub, pool hall, pool room, pub, recreation center and any other like or similar name describing the same or similar type of activity) which holds any consumption on premises alcoholic beverage license but which does not meet the requirements of restaurant, private club or licensed alcoholic beverage caterer as defined herein.     Brown bagging means the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments licensed for the retail sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for the purpose of drinking such alcoholic beverages at any such establishment.     Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverages obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines.     Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid to any member, officer, agent or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any council on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to bills of members and their guests under club regulations shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages.     Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises.     Fortified wines means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy.     Grocery store means a business which holds a grocery store retail business license issued by the city, and which: (1)  Is engaged primarily in the retail sale of food and beverage items by the package designed for nonpremises consumption; and (2)  Maintains at no time a retail inventory of alcoholic beverages which in more than 30 percent, valued at its retail sales price, of the total retail inventory of merchandise of such business, valued at its retail sales price.     Legal age means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended from time to time, as the age below which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold to, furnished to, purchased by or possessed by a person.     License means the authorization granted by the city to engage in the sale of specified alcoholic beverages upon the premises so licensed for a calendar year, or the remaining portion of a calendar year.     Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to article VI of this chapter.     Licensee means a person holding a license issued pursuant the terms of this chapter.     Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to the premises of a restaurant or its adjacent lobby or reception area, with all booths, stools, and tables located therein being open to view only from within the lounge, with a seating capacity of at least 20 persons, and with all access and all exits to and from the lounge opening into such restaurant or the lobby or reception area adjoining such restaurant except for emergency exits or exits used solely as service doors.     Malt beverages means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer provided that the term "malt beverage" does not include sake, also known as Japanese rice wine.     Manager means the individual who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter and who is physically present on site at such business (a) at least 35 hours per week, or (b) at least 90 percent of the hours such business is open to the public, whichever is less.     Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container.     Premises means the space or area owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee and used by the licensee for the purpose of operating under the license and shall include that area circumscribed by the property lines of the property for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" shall include only that portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold, delivered, or served.     Private club means a nonprofit organization which is organized under state law which meets each of the following requirements: (1)  Has either a tax exempt status under section 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code or operates pursuant to a charter from a state or national parent organization which has such tax exempt status; (2)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for an alcoholic beverage license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; (3)  Has at least 50 members paying dues on a regular periodic basis; (4)  Is organized and operated exclusively for the pleasure and recreation of its members and their guests or for other nonprofitable purposes; (5)  Has facilities which are available for use only by the membership thereof and their guests and not by the general public; (6)  Owns, rents or leases a building or space within a building for facilities for the use of its members and their guests; (7)  Maintains kitchen and dining room space, equipment and items necessary to appropriately provide food service of full course meals for its members and their guests; (8)  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for the preparation and service of meals for its members and their guests; (9)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits, beyond a fixed salary, from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or to its members or their guests; and (10)  Has such licenses as are required for the operation thereof.     Restaurant means a business kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served for a period of at least five hours per day on at least five days per week with the exception of (i) holidays, (ii) vacations not exceeding two weeks duration, and (iii) periods of redecorating not exceeding 30 calendar days duration except to the extent extended by the city council in its discretion upon request therefor; and which meets all of the following requirements: (1)  Meets all health and sanitation requirements for food service establishments required under applicable federal, state and local laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations; (2)  Maintains upon the premises thereof in operative condition cooking and kitchen facilities and equipment appropriate to accommodate the preparation of meals for 30 food service customers at one time; (3)  Maintains upon the premises thereof seating facilities, at booths or tables designed for food service, sufficient for at least 30 food service customers at one time, not including seating provided by counters and stools, with booths and tables for purposes hereof being large enough to adequately accommodate at least two place settings of cutlery and dishes; (4)  Maintains at all times such additional facilities, equipment and items as well as employees as shall be necessary for the cooking, preparation and service of meals for consumption at tables or booths located upon the premises for at least 30 food service customers at one time; (5)  Is at all times during the hours of operation thereof prepared to serve full course meals with substantial entrees from a substantial variety of culinary choices, or substantial substitutes therefor, chosen by food service customers from a printed menu available to all food service customers at prices which are competitive with other restaurants in the community whether or not such other restaurants engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages; and (6)  Derives at least 50 percent of its total gross food and beverage sales from the sale of full course meals prepared, served and consumed upon the premises thereof.     Retail sale means the sale or offer of sale of any alcoholic beverage to any member of the public.     Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combination of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (b)  As used in this chapter, the singular and the plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. (c)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-2. - Activities are privileges.     The manufacture, distribution, sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within the city are privileges and not rights with any privilege with respect thereto granted pursuant to this chapter to the holder of any alcoholic beverage license being held and enjoyed only for so long as the holder of such license issued pursuant to this chapter shall fully and completely comply with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required.     No person shall: (1)  Distribute, sell, or offer to sell, either at retail or wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in the city except to the extent permitted pursuant to a current alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; (2)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell, or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any provision of any law or regulation of the state relative to any alcoholic beverage; (3)  Distribute, handle, possess, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-4. - Sales permitted.     The sale of malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits, subject to the provisions of this chapter, as this chapter may be amended from time to time, are permitted in the city. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-5. - Consumption in public places.     Except to the extent otherwise specifically permitted, no person shall consume any alcoholic beverage while such person is located in or upon any public street, road, alley, lane or sidewalk of the city or upon the premises of any building owned or leased by the city or upon the premises of any other property, either real or personal, owned or leased by the city. Functions sponsored by the city or any other governmental unit shall be exempt from this prohibition. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-6. - Open containers.     Except to the extent otherwise specifically permitted, no person shall have in such person's possession any package which contains an alcoholic beverage which has been opened or the seal of which has been broken while such person is located in or upon any public street, road, alley, lane, or sidewalk of the city or upon the premises of any building owned or leased by the city or upon the premises of any other property, either real or personal, owned or leased by the city. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-7. - False and misleading statements.     No person shall make, cause to be made, or present to the city any application for issuance, application for renewal, report, or other notification with respect to any alcoholic beverage license issued or sought to be issued or renewed by the city or any tax on alcoholic beverages due to the city which contains as of the date made or presented, any untrue or misleading statement or representation. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-8. - Knowledge of chapter.     The holder of any alcoholic beverage license as well as all employees, agents and servants of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall be conclusively presumed, for purposes of this chapter, to have at all times complete and full knowledge of all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-9. - Notification to state revenue department of violations.     Upon determination of the existence of circumstances which are required pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 to be reported to the state department of revenue, the finance director shall promptly report the existence of such circumstances to the state department of revenue as required. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-10. - Criminal conviction not required.     Any proceeding or action which may be taken by the city with respect to the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license or the grant, denial or renewal of any such license shall be and are administrative in nature with respect to the privileges of the holder of such license and the right of such holder to continue to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in accordance with the provision of this chapter. No conviction, dismissal, acquittal, other plea or other disposition with respect to any criminal violation involving the sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages or any other alleged criminal conduct shall be necessary for any action by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relative to any such license or otherwise effect any action taken by the city relative thereto. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-11. - Violation and penalties. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. (b)  The following guidelines for the disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are hereby adopted. It is emphasized that these are guidelines only and can be altered based upon the facts of any individual case. The guidelines for disposition of alcoholic beverage license violations are as follows: (1)  First offense within past two years: 30 days suspension and $150.00 reinstatement fee; (2)  Second offense within past two years: 90 days suspension and $250.00 reinstatement fee; unless (3)  Second offense within past 12 months: Revocation; (4)  Third offense within past two years: Revocation. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-12—6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM AGE 
Sec. 6-30. - Presence of persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to be or remain upon the premises licensed if such business is a bar as defined herein. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-31. - Consumption by persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-32. - Possession by persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant, or employee of any business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operations of the business in which such license is utilized, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, permit or allow any person who has not attained legal age to possess any alcoholic beverage upon the premises licensed. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-33. - Furnishing to persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized sell, provide, give, furnish or distribute any alcoholic beverage to any person who has not attained legal age. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description of and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-34. - Acquiring for persons not of legal age.     No person, who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized, shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of any person who has not attained legal age, or otherwise procure for or furnish to any person who has not attained legal age any alcoholic beverage, except for medical purpose upon the prescription of a physician duly licensed under the laws of the state. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-35. - Employment of persons not 18 years of age. (a)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained 18 years of age and who is employed by any business operated upon premises for which an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city to engage in the sale, distribution, or acceptance of orders for alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to nor prohibit persons who have not attained 18 years of age who are employed by a business in connection with the operation at such premises of a grocery store, as such term is defined in this chapter from engaging in the sale, distribution, and handling of alcoholic beverages at such premises in connection with employment in the operation of such business. (b)  No holder of an alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall permit or allow any person who has not attained 18 years of age to be employed by any business operated upon premises for which a license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon such premises is issued by the city; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to nor prohibit the employment of persons who have not attained 18 years of age in connection with the operation upon such premises of a restaurant, provided further, that persons who have not attained 18 years of age shall not engage in the sale, service, or acceptance of orders of alcoholic beverages in connection with the operation of any such restaurant. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-36. - Failure to check identification.     No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of the business in which any such license is utilized shall in connection with the operation of the business in which such license is utilized fail to require or check the identification of the person to whom any alcoholic beverage is sold or furnished prior to the sale, furnishing or distribution of any alcoholic beverage or any person who has not attained legal age. No person shall be in violation of the provisions hereof in the event that (i) such person has been furnished with identification showing that the person who is being furnished with alcoholic beverages has attained legal age and (ii) under the surrounding circumstances the person so furnished such identification could reasonably conclude that the person furnishing such identification had attained legal age. For purposes of this action, the term "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person such as the person's photograph or other written description and providing the person's date of birth, and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, a military identification card, or a driver's license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 
Sec. 6-61. - License required for sales.     No person shall sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages which is permitted to be sold in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such sale is made or is to be made pursuant to the authority of a current effective alcoholic beverage license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-62. - Classification of licenses.     Alcoholic beverage licenses authorized to be issued by the city and required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be held for the sale of alcoholic beverages are classified as follows: (1)  Wholesale malt beverage license; (2)  Retail malt beverage package license; (3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license; (4)  Wholesale wine license; (5)  Retail wine package license; (6)  Retail wine consumption license; and (7)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-63. - Activities authorized pursuant to licenses.     The holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, as well as the employees of such holder, shall be authorized subject to the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state relative thereto and the rules, regulations and requirements of the state department of revenue relative thereto to engage in the following respective activities but none other than those which are specifically authorized with respect to each such license: (1)  Wholesale malt beverage license, wholesale sale only of malt beverage in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of effective retail malt beverage licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; (2)  Retail malt beverage package license, retail sale only of malt beverages in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; (3)  Retail malt beverage consumption license, retail sale only of malt beverages to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises; (4)  Wholesale wine license, wholesale sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to the holders of current retail wine licenses issued by the state department of revenue for the purpose of resale only; (5)  Retail wine package license, retail sale only of wine in original unbroken and sealed containers to consumers for take out only and not for consumption upon the licensed premises; (6)  Retail wine consumption license, retail sale only of wine to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises; (7)  Retail distilled spirits consumption license, retail sale only of distilled spirits to consumers for consumption only upon the licensed premises. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-64. - Qualifications for license.     No alcoholic beverage license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued to any person or for any location unless and until it has been successfully demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council that: (1)  Such person, or the person who shall actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which such license shall be utilized is a citizen of the United States of America; (2)  Such person by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, moral character, mental capacity, physical capacity, trade associations, record of arrest, and reputation in communities in which he has lived is, in the opinion of the city council, likely to operate the business in which the license will be utilized in conformity with federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and requirements, including particularly the provisions of this chapter and the laws, rules and regulations of the state and the United States relative to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and, in making such determination, the city council shall, in addition to the other and further provisions of this section, consider all information that would be considered by the city council if this person was being denied a renewal license pursuant to the requirements of section 6-82 or, if this person was having his license suspended or revoked pursuant to the requirements of section 6-86; provided further that no license shall be issued to or for: a.  Any person whose business in which the license will be utilized is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possessed and meets all of the qualifications required hereunder for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; b.  A partnership unless all partners, members and managers of such partnership, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; c.  A corporation unless all officers thereof, all directors thereof and all shareholders thereof who shall either directly or beneficially as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto own more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, as well as the manager of the business in which the license will be utilized, possess and meet all of the qualifications for the holder of an alcoholic beverage license and would not be prohibited from being the holder of such a license; d.  Any person who has been convicted, has entered a plea of nolo contendere or has forfeited a bond with respect to any felony within ten years prior to the filing of any such application or with respect to any misdemeanor within five years prior to the filing of any such application including particularly but not being limited to those offenses involving force or violence, prostitution, gambling, or tax law violations in the event that such conviction, plea or bond forfeiture tends to indicate, in the opinion of the city council, that the applicant may not maintain or operate the business in which the alcoholic beverage license sought by the applicant would be utilized in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. The terms "felony" and "misdemeanor" as used in this subsection shall include the violation of any criminal law of the United States of America, the state, or any other state of the United States of America; provided that the term "misdemeanor" shall not include those violations which are commonly referred to as "traffic violations." The term "conviction" as used in this subsection shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; e.  Any person who has been convicted of, has entered a plea of nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond to any charge of violation of any state, federal, or local law involving the manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of alcoholic beverages, contraband, or any "controlled substances" as such term is utilized under laws of the state, or any other substance, the control or possession of which is controlled or prohibited under laws of the state or the United States of America, or any other state of the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond by a person charged with a crime. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council, in its sole discretion, may decide to authorize the issuance of a license to a person who has in the past been convicted of, plead guilty to, entered a plea of nolo contendere or forfeited a bond on any crime when, after a thorough investigation of all the facts including parole or probation officer's reports, judge's recommendations, and any other evidence bearing on the character of the applicant, it has determined, in the sole discretion of the city council, that such action is in keeping with the ends of justice and the public interest and welfare; f.  Any person who as either the previous holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority, or as a party interested in any business in which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was utilized, either conducted, or allowed the conduct of, the business with respect to which such license was issued in such a manner as to cause, in the opinion of the city council, greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law or regulation either relating to such license or the business associated therewith or in order to maintain public order; g.  Any location not suitable therefor, in the opinion of the city council, because of either traffic congestion or the general character of the neighborhood or by reason of the effect which the utilization of such license at such location would have upon adjacent and surrounding properties or upon adjacent neighborhoods; h.  Any location for which there is an unpaid or unsatisfied tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation; i.  Any person who has not attained the age of 21 years; j.  Any person who either held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority which was revoked by such authority within a one-year period immediately prior to the date of the filing of an application or was a party interested in any business in which any alcoholic beverage license issued by any authority was revoked by such authority within the one-year period prior to the date of the filing of an application; k.  Any location that is within 100 yards, as measured in a straight line from the nearest point on the property which will be the location of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license will be utilized to the nearest point on the property upon which is located a church, school, college, or alcohol or drug treatment center operated by any governmental agency, with the terms "school" and "college" as used in this subsection meaning those institutions which are both (i) operated either by a governmental or church entity and (ii) are engaged in courses of instruction which are commonly taught in public primary or secondary schools or colleges in the state; l.  Any location at which the utilization of the licensee would cause or create any violation of the zoning ordinance of the city or of the building code or fire code of the city; m.  Any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, there exists the likelihood that the utilization of such license at such location would cause or necessitate greater than normal police activity, observation or inspection in order to either prevent violation of laws and regulations relating to such location or to maintain public order, due to the history of either (i) violations of the provisions of this chapter or of the laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to alcoholic beverages by the holder of the previous license at such location or agents, servants or employees thereof or (ii) activities or conduct of patrons of the business in which such previous license was utilized at such location, all as compared to the locations of other licenses, or would cause or tend to cause, in the opinion of the city, council, greater than normal community problems or conflict as compared to the locations of other licenses; n.  Any location at which an alcoholic beverage license has previously been suspended or revoked by either the city or the state department of revenue and where, in the opinion of the city council, problems associated with the utilization of a prior alcoholic beverage license at such location were such that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare to grant any other alcoholic beverage license for such location; o.  Any person or any location with respect to which the granting or utilization of a license would constitute a violation of laws, rules or regulations of the state; or p.  Any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection 6-66(2), (3) or (4) who has not paid or satisfied any tax or other financial obligation due to the city which is not then the subject of appeal or litigation. (3)  In addition to the other qualifications set forth herein, an applicant for a retail distilled spirits license must meet all of the requirements of either the following subsection a. (restaurant), subsection b. (licensed alcoholic beverage caterer) or subsection c. (private club): a.  No license will be issued unless the license applicant likewise operates a restaurant upon the proposed licensed premises and such restaurant: 1.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on the premises; and 2.  Such sales of food prepared, served and consumed on the premises constitutes at least 50 percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales on the premises. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 3.  Has permanent seating capacity at tables and booths, not counting bar stools, for at least 30 persons; and 4.  Meets all of the definitional requirements of "restaurant" set forth in section 6-1 of this chapter. b.  No license will be issued unless the license applicant is a food caterer that: 1.  Holds a valid license from the city authorizing such applicant to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises; and 2.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on either the premises or off-premises at an authorized catered function; and 3.  Such sales of food prepared, served and consumed on the premises or off-premises at an authorized catered function constitutes at least 50 percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales of the food caterer. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 4.  Meets all of the requirements set forth in article VI of this chapter. c.  No license will be issued unless the license applicant likewise operates a food service facility upon the proposed licensed premises which is a private club and such private club: 1.  Sells food prepared, served and consumed on the premises and such food sales constitute at least 50 percent of the gross income of all food and beverage sales on the premises. The term "gross income" shall not include tips or gratuities which may be added to the base food bill; and 2.  Meets all the definitional requirements of "private club" set forth in section 6-1 of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-65. - Location.     Not withstanding any other provision of this article, the location with respect to which an alcoholic beverage license has been issued by the city shall remain eligible for issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses by the city notwithstanding subsequent changes which would otherwise render the locations nonlicensable under subsection 6-64(2)k. for so long as an alcoholic beverage license remains issued for such location by the city and further provided that in the event of the termination of any such license issued with respect to such location the location itself shall thereafter remain eligible for the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses if within six months following such termination an alcoholic beverage license is issued by the city for such location. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-66. - Applications.     Prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant therefor shall file with the city a written application, in such form and substance as shall from time to time be determined by the city manager, together with separate certified checks payable to the city or cash for both the application fee provided for in this article and for the licensee fee provided for in this article. Applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be presented to the finance director or his designee, shall be signed by the applicant if any individual, or by all partners if a partnership, or by a duly authorized agent if a corporation, shall be verified by oath or affidavit, shall contain the following statements and information and shall otherwise meet the following requirements: (1)  In the case of an individual applicant who will actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses of the applicant within the last ten years; (2)  In the case of an individual applicant who will not actually and actively be in charge and management of the day to day operation of the business in which the licensee applied for will be utilized, then the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current residence address, business addresses, and all previous such addresses within the last ten years of both the applicant and the person who will actively manage such business; (3)  In the case of a partnership, then the name, date and location of formation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, and all prior business addresses within the past ten years of such partnership as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, birthdate, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the past ten years of all partners, members and managers of such partnership and the manager or managers of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized; (4)  In the case of a corporation, then the name, date and location of incorporation, federal tax identification number, current principal business address, name and address of registered agent in the state for service of process, and all prior business addresses within the last ten years of such corporation as well as the name, age, sex, height, weight, social security number, current business address, current residence address, and all prior such addresses within the last ten years of all officers thereof, all directors thereof, and all shareholders thereof who own either directly or beneficially, as such word is defined and utilized in the Internal Revenue Code of the United States and regulations issued pursuant thereto, more than 20 percent of the outstanding shares of stock thereof, and of the manager or managers of the business, in which the license applied for will be utilized; (5)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has made at any prior time any application to any governmental entity for any alcoholic beverage license of any nature and, if so, the circumstances thereof, including the disposition and current status thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (6)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity, the circumstances thereof, and the present status of such license all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (7)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever held any alcoholic beverage license issued by any governmental entity which has been suspended or revoked and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (8)  A statement with respect to whether the applicant or any person with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section has ever been convicted of, entered a plea or nolo contendere to, or forfeited a bond on, any crime other than traffic violations and, if so, the nature and circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (9)  A statement with respect to whether any person or entity other than the applicant and those persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section is or will be either directly or indirectly interested in the profits or losses of the business in which the license applied for will be utilized and, if so, the circumstances thereof, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (10)  The classification of license applied for; (11)  The location with respect to which the license will be utilized and the name and nature of the business in which the license will be utilized, all in sufficient detail to evaluate such application; (12)  A statement that both the applicant and all other person's with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section are fully qualified in all respects under this chapter to be the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city and that all such persons are entitled to have the license requested issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; (13)  A statement that the location with respect to which the licensee is sought meets all conditions, qualifications and criteria established in this chapter for the location of a business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license applied for; (14)  Such other information and statements as shall from time to time be required by the city manager or the city council; (15)  A complete set of fingerprints administered by the police department of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; (16)  A head and shoulder photograph, such as is contained on a state driver's license, taken within the past three years of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section; and (17)  Written consents of the applicant and all persons with respect to whom information is required under subsections (2), (3) or (4) of this section that the city has the continuing permission and authority of all such persons to monitor the public records of the city, county, the state and of the United States to ensure on-going compliance with the statements set forth in subsections (7) and (8) of this section. Any license granted upon an application that does not contain such written consent shall automatically expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. Such license cannot be renewed under the provisions of sections 6-77 and 6-79. Rather, the city shall treat the request for renewal for such license as an application for a new license under section 6-66. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-67. - Designation of agent.     All applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses made by a corporation or a partnership shall name in the application one or more persons as the agent and representative for the corporation or partnership to receive all communications, notices, service of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation or partnership in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any such license. The application shall give the mailing address of such person, or persons, with the mailing of any notice to any such person at the address so furnished being sufficient notice to the corporation or partnership. If any such person shall cease to be the agent and representative of such corporation or partnership, another person shall immediately be appointed by the license holder and written notice shall be given the city stating the name and address of such new agent and representative. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-68. - Application fee.     The application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be accompanied by a certified check payable to the city or cash in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk as an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application and conducting necessary investigations, which fee shall be nonrefundable upon denial of the application and shall not apply toward any licensee fee or excise tax payable by the licensee if the application is granted. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-69. - Investigation of application.     Upon receipt by the finance director or designee of any application for an alcoholic beverage license, such application shall be forwarded to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall report his findings with respect thereto in writing and shall attach thereto the police record, if any, of every person named in the application. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-70. - Recommendation.     The finance director shall conduct investigation and study with respect to an application for the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license as he shall deem necessary and shall report the investigation and study to the city manager together with his recommendation, if any, as to what action should be taken with respect to the grant or denial of the application for such license and the city manager shall in turn conduct such additional investigation as he shall deem necessary and report the investigation to the city council with his recommendation as to what action should be taken with respect to the grant or denial of the application for such license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-71. - Grant or denial of application. (a)  Following receipt by the city council of an application for an alcoholic beverage license together with the written report of the chief of police and the written recommendations relative thereto, the city council shall either: (1)  Grant such application and direct issuance of a license in connection therewith subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter; or (2)  Table action on such application pending a hearing on such application as provided in this section. If such application is so tabled by the council then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring such applicant to show cause, if any the applicant can, at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as to why the application should not be denied as well as written notice of the findings of the chief of police, the recommendation of the finance director relative to such application, if any, and the recommendation of the city manager relative thereto. (b)  The hearing provided for above, which need not be a regular meeting of the city council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application should be granted and should not be denied and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting of the application, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceedings transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. (c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the grant or denial of such application. (d)  Upon the denial of such application, the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of the decision and the reasons therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the licensee fee tendered in connection with the application but not the application fee which shall be nonrefundable. (e)  Upon the grant of such application the city manager shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and the finance director shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be issued. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-72. - Issuance of license.     Upon the approval of an application for an alcoholic beverage license by the city council, the finance director, or his designee, shall cause to be issued to the applicant the license applied for with respect to the location listed in the application upon payment of all fees and charges required therefor and subject to the conditions and limitations imposed in this chapter relative thereto. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-73. - Conditions and limitation of license.     The grant and issuance of an alcoholic beverage license to an applicant shall be conditioned upon: (1)  Payment of all fees, charges and taxes applicable thereto; (2)  Obtaining and maintenance of a license issued by the state department of revenue to the applicant for the location listed in the application for the same type activity which is authorized in the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city; (3)  Obtaining and maintaining a business license issued by the city with respect to the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is to be utilized; (4)  All statements, representations and information contained in the application for such license and all renewal and amended applications relative thereto continuing to remain materially unchanged except to the extent contained in amended application which have been granted pursuant to the provisions of section 6-89; and (5)  Compliance with all requirements and provisions of this chapter and all laws, rules and regulations of the state relative to the sale, distribution and possession of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-74. - License fees. (a)  In addition to all other charges, taxes, and fees relative thereto, annual alcoholic beverage license fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city manager are imposed (which, consistent with city policy, are set by the city manager) and shall be paid prior to the issuance of or renewal of any alcoholic beverage license; (b)  License fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages are due and payable immediately upon issuance thereof and immediately as of the date of renewal thereof; (c)  Any license issued at any time during a calendar year shall require the payment of the license fee on the same proration schedule as utilized for the payment of occupation taxes; and (d)  All license fees payable under this section shall be paid either in lawful currency of the United States of America or by certified or cashier's check payable to the city. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-75. - Duration.     No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued for a period of time less than the remainder of such calendar year. In the event of the revocation, suspension, termination, lapse or surrender of a license before the expiration of a calendar year there shall not be any refund therefor. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-76. - Expiration.     All alcoholic beverage licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued with all applications for a renewal of the license for the ensuing year to be treated as applications for new licenses except to the extent otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-77. - Application for renewal.     The holder of any alcoholic beverages license who desires to renew such license shall annually file with the city manager, or his designee, an application therefor in such form and content as shall be determined from time to time by the city manager on or before 12:00 noon on November 1 of the year preceding the year for which the application for renewal is made. Such application for renewal shall be accompanied by the applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year. Failure of any holder of any alcoholic beverage license to file such application for renewal by such time and to pay together therewith the required applicable annual license fee for the ensuing year shall render the license void, lapsed, and nonrenewed effective as of the last minute of December 31 of that year; provided however, that for providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city manager, the city manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the time for filing of such application for renewal and payment of such license fee for a period of time not later than January 31 of such ensuing year. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-78. - Lapse of license. (a)  If the holder of any alcoholic beverage license fails to timely file an application for renewal or to pay such annual license fee, as the time therefor may be extended pursuant to this chapter, then such license shall automatically become nonrenewed and lapsed. (b)  In such event, in order to obtain an alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (c)  In such event, pending receipt of other such alcoholic beverage license, such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license and shall immediately cease and desist in conducting such sales. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-79. - Operation pending renewal.     Upon the timely filing of an application for renewal of any alcoholic beverage license and the payment of the required license fee therefor pursuant to the provisions of section 6-77, the holder of such license shall be entitled to continue to engage in the activity authorized pursuant to the license issued for the previous year, subject to the provisions of this article, pending action on the application for renewal of such license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-80. - Review of application for renewal.     All applications for renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be reviewed by the city manager and/or his designees prior to the December regular meeting of the city council. (a)  All applications for renewal that have had: (1)  No change in ownership and no change in management; and (2)  No events that could trigger any ground for denial of nonrenewal set forth in section 6-82 of this Code shall be renewed administratively. The city manager shall provide city council with a list of such administrative renewals. (b)  Those applications for renewal that have had: (1)  A change in ownership or management; and/or (2)  Any event that could trigger any ground for denial of nonrenewal set for in section 6-82 of this Code shall be submitted by the city manager to city council along with a written recommendation with respect to the renewal or nonrenewal of each such alcoholic beverage license. Recommendations for renewal may be summary in form and may be collective; however, any recommendation for nonrenewal shall be made individually and shall specify the reasons for recommendation for nonrenewal. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-81. - Grant or denial of renewal. (a)  On or before the regular January meeting thereof, the city council shall with respect to each application for renewal coming to it pursuant to subsection 6-80(b) of this Code either: (1)  Grant such application for renewal; or (2)  Table action on such application pending a hearing on such application for renewal as provided in this section. (b)  If an application for renewal is so tabled then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the applicant requiring the applicant to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted at a hearing at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation by mail or otherwise upon the applicant as well as written notice of the recommendation and reasons of the city manager relative to nonrenewal of such license or the recommendation of the city manager for renewal of such license, as the case may be. (c)  The hearing provided for in subsection (b) of this section, which meeting need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the applicant or for good cause shown. At such hearing the applicant shall have the opportunity to show cause why the application for renewal should be granted and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence against granting the application for renewal, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the applicant's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. (d)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding the granting or denial of such application for renewal. (e)  Upon the denial of such application the city manager shall cause the applicant to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and shall cause to be returned to the applicant the license fee tendered in connection with the application for renewal whereupon, effective 30 days following notification by the city manager to the applicant thereof, all rights of the applicant to operate under the license for the preceding year shall lapse and terminate and the applicant shall cease and desist from all activity authorized under the prior alcoholic beverage license sought to be renewed. (f)  Upon the grant of such application for renewal the city manager shall promptly notify the applicant thereof and the finance director shall promptly proceed to cause the license applied for to be renewed. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-82. - Grounds for denial of application for renewal.     The city council shall be entitled to deny renewal of any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence, in the opinion of the city council, of any of the following: (1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license of any of the following: a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude; (2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; (3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; (4)  Failure of the applicant for renewal, or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the application for renewal, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; (5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; (6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: a.  Any violation of this chapter; b.  Any other violation of law; c.  Any violation of any other city ordinance; or d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; (7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: a.  Fighting; b.  Disorderly conduct; c.  Utilization of controlled substances; d.  Gambling; e.  Indecent conduct; f.  Excessive noise; or (8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-83. - Transfer of licenses. (a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses issued by the city shall be personal to the person to whom issued and are applicable only to the location for which application therefor is made and accordingly no license shall be transferable to any person or entity or to any other location. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, then upon application and approval by the city manager subject to the terms of this section, an alcoholic beverage license may be utilized by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person, or by the heirs at law of the deceased person, in the event that such administrator, executor, personal representative or heirs meet all of the qualifications contained in this chapter for the issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, with the license of such deceased person to be so utilized by the administrator, executor, personal representative, or heirs of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete administration of the estate of such deceased person, but in no event longer than six months from the date of the death of such deceased person, with such license to lapse upon the earlier of such six-month period, completion of such administration, or December 31 of the year in which death shall occur. (c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, in the event that the person to whom an alcoholic beverage license is issued certifies under oath in writing to the city manager that the business served by such alcoholic beverage license is relocating to another physical location within the city, the city manager may, upon payment to the city of an application amendment fee, provide for an amended license specific to the new location if such new location meets all of the requirements of this chapter. In no event shall any holder of an alcoholic beverage license operate under that license at more than one location at any time. (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any change in the ownership interests of a partnership or corporation which holds any alcoholic beverage license, as reflected in the initial application for such license, shall cause the immediate cessation of sales of any alcoholic beverages and no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made until such change in the ownership interests is approved by the city council based upon the qualification of all persons then interested therein in accordance with the provisions hereof or until the issuance of another license to such corporation or partnership upon a new application therefor; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply in a situation in which one or more individuals who have existing interest in the entity which holds the license cease to have such interest and the remaining ownership interest in such entity remains unchanged except as to the division of the remaining interests therein. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-84. - Emergency suspension.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter: (1)  The chief of police shall be authorized, upon concurrence with respect thereto by the city manager, to suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage, and to close the business in which such license is utilized, for such period of time as shall be determined to be necessary, but in no event in excess of 24 hours duration, in the event of: a.  Any national, state or local emergency; b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety. (2)  The city council may, in its sole discretion, and either with or without notice or hearing, suspend the right of the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to sell or otherwise distribute any alcoholic beverage for such period of time as it may deem necessary, but in no event in excess of 30 days duration, in the event of: a.  Any national, state or local emergency; b.  Any riotous or violent circumstances either with respect to such location only or the community generally; or c.  Any circumstances which require such action in order to prevent conditions which are contrary to public health, welfare or safety; provided, however, that in no event shall such period of suspension exceed ten days duration without an opportunity to be heard being afforded to the holder of such license in connection with the continuance thereafter of such emergency suspension, with notice thereof and such hearing hereon being the same as provided in section 6-85 for suspension of alcoholic beverage licenses generally. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-85. - Suspension or revocation of license. (a)  Upon a preliminary determination by the city manager that a ground or grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, then the city manager shall cause a written citation to be issued to the holder of such license requiring such holder to show cause, if any such holder can, at a hearing before the city council at a time and place specified therein which shall not be less than five days nor more than 30 days from the date of service of the citation, by mail or otherwise, upon such holder as well as written notice of the reasons believed by the city manager to authorize possible suspension or revocation of such license. (b)  The hearing provided for in subsection (a) of this section, which need not be a regular meeting of the council, may be continued by announcement at such time and place due to the lack of a quorum of the city council or at the request of the license holder or for good cause shown for a period of not longer than ten days. At such hearing the holder of the license shall have the opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked and shall be entitled to the opportunity to present evidence, to present witnesses, to cross examine witnesses presenting evidence in favor of suspension or revocation, to be represented by an attorney, and to have the proceeding transcribed or recorded at the license holder's expense, all in accordance with such rules and procedures as may be adopted from time to time by the city council relative thereto. (c)  Following the conclusion of such hearing the city council shall, at a regular or called meeting thereof within 30 days of the date of such hearing, render its decision regarding whether the license in issue should be suspended or revoked and, if suspended, then the duration of such suspension and the amount of license reinstatement fee which amount shall not be in excess of $250.00, if any, as the city council shall in its sole discretion determine to be appropriate under the circumstances, which license reinstatement fee shall be paid as a condition to reinstatement of the license following suspension. (d)  Upon the suspension or revocation of such license then the city manager shall cause the license holder to be notified in writing within ten days of such decision of the nature of such decision and the grounds therefor and thereupon the license shall immediately become suspended or terminated in accordance with such decision and the license holder shall immediately upon receipt of such notice cease and desist from all activity authorized under such alcoholic beverage license in accordance with such decision and physically surrender such license to the finance director. (e)  If the city council determines that grounds do not exist to suspend or terminate such license or decides to not suspend or terminate such license notwithstanding the existence of grounds therefor then the city manager shall promptly notify the license holder thereof. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-86. - Grounds for suspension or revocation.     The city council shall be entitled, in its sole discretion, to either suspend or revoke any alcoholic beverage license upon a finding by the city council, following the hearing prescribed in connection therewith, of the existence of any of the following: (1)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license and of the following: a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, distribution, sale or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.  Any provision, condition, requirement or limitation contained in this chapter; c.  Any criminal law which is classified as a felony; or d.  Any criminal law involving moral turpitude; (2)  Any violation by the holder of the alcoholic beverage license or by any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license or by any employee, agent, or servant of the holder of such license or the business in which such license is utilized, all in connection with the maintenance or operation of any business in which an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized, of any of the following: a.  Any federal or state law, rule or regulation relative to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages; b.  Any provision, condition, requirement, or limitation contained in this chapter; c.  Any other ordinance of the city; or d.  Any ordinance, rule, regulation or law of any governmental entity otherwise regulating the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; (3)  The initial application for issuance of such alcoholic beverage license, any application for renewal thereof, or any amended application relative thereto contained, as of the time made, material false or misleading statements or information or was otherwise misrepresentative or misleading; (4)  Failure of the holder of such license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license, to meet, as of the time of the notice of hearing relative thereto, the requirements established in this chapter for the initial issuance of such license; (5)  Suspension or revocation during the period of time that the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city has been issued for such location by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued for the location of the business in which the alcoholic beverage license issued by the city is utilized; (6)  Failure of the holder of the license or any employee or agent of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly report to the police department of the city: a.  Any violation of this chapter; b.  Any other violation of law; c.  Any other violation of any other city ordinance; or d.  Any breach of the peace, disturbance or alteration which occurs within or upon the premises of the business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized; (7)  Repeated failure of the holder of the license or the employees, agent and servants of the business in which such license is utilized to promptly control and prevent within or upon the premises of such business any of the following activities or conduct: a.  Fighting; b.  Disorderly conduct; c.  Utilization of controlled substances; d.  Gambling; e.  Indecent conduct; f.  Excessive noise; or (8)  Failure of the holder of the license or any other person required under this chapter in connection with such license to meet the qualifications required for the issuance of such license to promptly pay and satisfy all taxes and other financial obligations due to the city which are not the subject of appeal or litigation. (9)  With respect to a retail distilled spirits consumption license, failure to derive at least 50 percent of its gross food and beverage sales, excluding tips and gratuities, from the sale of food prepared, served and consumed upon the licensed premises thereof. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-87. - Termination.     All rights and privileges of the holder of an alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall terminate upon the first to occur of the following: (1)  Death of the holder of such license, except to the extent on any right to continue to utilize such license as provided in subsection 6-83(b); (2)  Dissolution of a corporation or partnership which are holder of such license; (3)  The filing of any voluntary bankruptcy proceedings under the bankruptcy code by the holder of such license or the failure of the holder of such license to, within 60 days of the date of filing thereof, obtain dismissal of and involuntary proceeding filed under the bankruptcy code against the holder of such license; (4)  Lapse of such license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; (5)  Denial by the city council of an application for renewal of such license; (6)  Revocation thereof by the city council; (7)  Surrender thereof by the licensee to the city; (8)  Automatically without any action on the part of the city upon revocation by the state department of revenue of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the state department of revenue to the holder of the license in issue with respect to such location; or (9)  The licensee ceases to be engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted with such license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-88. - Amended applications.     In the event that either (i) the business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized cease to be actively managed or operated on a day-to-day basis by the person so designated with respect thereto in the latest application relative to such license whether an initial, amended or renewal application; or (ii) any other material change occurs in any of the statements, representations or other information contained in any application relative to such license whether in an initial, amended or renewal application which has not otherwise been modified pursuant to an amended application previously granted pursuant to the provisions of this section, then: (1)  Within 30 calendar days of such occurrence the licensee shall file with the finance director an amended application with respect to such license, in such form and of such content as shall from time to time be prescribed therefore by the city manager, disclosing, in sufficient detail to evaluate the application, the nature and extent of such changes and, in the case of the cessation of management of such business as reflected in the latest such application, the full details and particulars relative to the person who is then actively managing or operating such business on a day-to-day basis, all to the same extent as required in an initial application; (2)  An amended application shall be accompanied by payment to the city by cashier's check or cash of an amended application processing fee which shall be nonrefundable regardless of the ultimate decision relative to such amended application; (3)  Upon receipt of an amended application, city officials shall conduct such investigations as shall be appropriate relative thereto and shall make recommendations relative thereto as in the case of an initial application; (4)  Upon receipt of recommendations relative thereto the city council shall proceed to act on such amended application as in the case of an initial application utilizing the same qualifications and criteria relative thereto as for an initial application and utilizing the same procedures with respect thereto; (5)  Grant or denial of an amended application shall be based upon a finding by the city council that, as of the date of the determination thereof by the city council, the amended application either meets or fails to meet the requirements, criteria and qualifications contained in this chapter which are necessary for the initial issuance of such alcoholic beverage license; (6)  Approval of an amended application by the city council shall constitute, effective as of the date of such approval, an amendment of the initial application; (7)  The licensee shall, following determination thereof by the city council, be notified by the city manager of such decision as in the case of an initial application; and (8)  Effective 15 days following notification by the city manager of denial of an amended application for such longer period of time as the city manager in his sole discretion determines appropriate under the circumstances, but in no event later than 30 days from the date of such notification: (i) such license shall lapse due to the failure of the licensee to continue to meet the qualifications, requirements and criteria for the grant of such license; (ii) all privileges relative to such license shall cease and terminate; (iii) such former licensee shall not be entitled to engage in the sale of the alcoholic beverages formerly authorized pursuant to such lapsed license; (iv) such former licensee shall immediately cease and desist from conducting such sales; and (v) in order to be authorized thereafter to engage in the sale of such alcoholic beverages the former licensee shall be required to file an application for another alcoholic beverage license and obtain approval thereof, all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-89. - Waiting period before reapplication.     Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, any unsuccessful applicant must wait 90 days from the date of final decision before reapplying. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-90. - One-day license for charitable organizations. (a)  Definitions. (1)  To qualify as a "charitable organization" as used herein, an organization must: a.  Either be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation, or must be formally organized, with a constitution and bylaws, and with a central governing body such as a board of trustees or directors to be directly responsible for the one-day license; and b.  Said organization must also have been granted approved tax exempt status by United States Internal Revenue Service. (2)  The term "charitable purposes" as used herein shall include the following: Relief of the indigent, medical research, provision of medical equipment, education, including youth education; historical preservation, preservation and encouragement of the fine arts; crime prevention and rehabilitation; libraries; zoos; scientific research and development; community development; industrial and commercial recruitment; and recreation. (3)  The term "proceeds" as used herein means the gross proceeds from the event in connection with which the license is issued after payment of all of the expenses of the event. (b)  License; fee. In addition to the other alcoholic beverage licenses provided for in this chapter, the city council may issue a consumption license valid for one day only to any charitable organization, authorizing the holder to dispense, at one location only, distilled spirits, alcoholic beverages, wines and malt beverages, by the drink for consumption only on the premises; provided, that: (1)  The proceeds from the event shall be used only for charitable purposes; and (2)  The city has permitted the event consistent with the event permit requirements of section 6-175 of this chapter; and (3)  No alcoholic beverages are sold at the event, i.e., open bar only as an emolument of the donation or fund raising ticket received by the charitable organization. If alcoholic beverages are to be sold at the event, then this section shall not apply. The provisions of section 6-74 of this chapter shall apply with respect to license fees. (c)  Application. Any charitable organization desiring to obtain a one-day alcoholic beverage license shall make application with sufficient evidence to satisfy the city council that the organization is a nonprofit charitable organization and that the proceeds will be used for charitable purposes. The organization shall designate one person who is a resident of the city who shall be responsible for the lawful and proper conduct of the alcoholic beverage license, giving the name, address and other information sufficient to identify such person. (d)  Excise tax not applicable. The excise tax imposed by article V of this chapter shall not be applicable to the one-day license inasmuch as the sale of alcoholic beverages is not involved. (e)  Final report. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the event, the license holder shall file a final report and accounting with the city council, said report and accounting to include a statement of the gross receipts, the amount of expenses paid, the net proceeds remaining, and how and to whom and for what purpose said net proceeds are to be distributed. Failure to comply with this reporting requirement shall make such charitable organization ineligible for the issuance of any subsequent license. (f)  Suspension or revocation. The city manager shall have the right at any time to suspend or revoke the one-day license on any ground which constitutes a ground for suspension or revocation of licenses generally under sections 6-85 and 6-86 of this chapter. Any aggrieved organization shall have the right of appeal to the city council. (g)  Applicability of chapter. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the one-day license. The charitable organization and the responsible person identified pursuant to subsection (c) hereinabove shall be in charge and responsible for the event and shall be subject to the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Ashburn with respect to any violation of any license or permit issued by the City of Ashburn. (h)  If a one-day alcoholic beverage license is issued following the full application review process involving the decision of city council, such qualified charitable organization may submit an application for an annual event renewal one-day alcoholic beverage license to the city manager or his designee who shall either grant such license or recommend denial. A staff recommendation to deny a renewal one-day alcoholic beverage license shall be reviewed and decided by city council. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 6, 2012, amended the Code by adding new provisions designated as § 6-100. At the discretion of the editor, § 6-100 has been redesignated as § 6-90. 
Secs. 6-91—6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS 
Sec. 6-121. - Hours of operation. (a)  Except as to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section relating to package sales of malt beverages and wines during certain hours on Sunday, retail dealers of malt beverages and/or wine shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays and shall not permit their places of business to be opened for the sale of such beverages on Sunday, Christmas Day, or any other days prohibited by state law. The hours of operation of wholesale licensees for the distribution of malt beverages and/or wine within the city shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. There shall be no malt beverages and/or wine sold or distributed within the city on Sundays, Christmas, or any other days prohibited by state law. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (c) of this section, and any other provisions of this chapter or Code to the contrary, the package sale of malt beverages and wine by the holders of licenses for the package sale of both, but not one, of said beverages, shall be lawful and permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. (c)  Establishments having an on-premises consumption license issued pursuant to section 6-36 of this chapter and realizing less than 50 percent of the business, as measured by gross receipts, from the sale of food shall not permit their places of business to be opened for any reason after 3:00 a.m. on weekdays and Sundays or anytime on Christmas day or any other days on which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 7-11-2013) 
Sec. 6-122. - Hours during which other activities prohibited.     Neither any holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any employee of any business in which such license is utilized shall allow or permit any alcoholic beverage to be handled in any manner upon the premises of the business in which such license is utilized or any alcoholic beverage to be located upon any table, counter, or other such customer service area upon such premises, either in the form of the original container therefor or otherwise, from one hour after the last time permitted to sell an alcoholic beverage as set forth in section 6-121 of this chapter until such time as alcoholic beverages may again be sold as set forth in section 6-121 of this chapter.     All premises licensed to engage in such sales by the drink may remain open for a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes beyond the time that the last alcoholic beverage can be lawfully located upon the table, counter or other customer service area of the licensed premises as set forth hereinabove at which time all customers and patrons must leave the licensed premises. Following such mandatory closing time, up to four employees of the business located upon the licensed premises may remain for up to an additional hour to handle all post-closing duties. If, because of special circumstances, additional time is needed by the employees for post-closing duties, the holder of the alcoholic beverage license at such licensed premises may contact the police for additional time for which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-123. - Election days; sale of malt beverages and/or wine.     The sale of malt beverages and/or wine shall not be prohibited on election days. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-124. - Advertising.     No holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall allow or permit any advertising to be placed or run in any media or by any other means with respect to the availability of alcoholic beverages at the location licensed except to the extent permitted by state law and rules and regulations relative thereto. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-125. - Consumption prohibited upon premises of package licensee.     No holder of a license only for the package sales of any alcoholic beverage nor any employee, agent or servant of any business in which only a license for package sales is utilized shall knowingly allow or permit the breaking of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold, or intentionally allow or permit the consumption of any of the contents of any package containing any alcoholic beverage upon the premises where sold. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-126. - Sales prohibited beyond premises.     No holder of any alcoholic beverage license or any employee, agent or servant of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized (herein collectively referred to as "licensee") shall sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at any location other than within the interior of the building located upon premises so licensed in which such sales are authorized or upon the patio or deck (whether under roof or not) adjoining the licensed premises. The licensee shall not be authorized to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverage at any other location upon or within the licensed premises (hereinafter referred to as "open areas") including, but not limited to, the parking lot of such location unless any such open areas are set apart by a rope, fence or other similar access control mechanism that has been approved by the police department in the interest of public safety and the promotion of law enforcement; and, further provided that such licensee must continually supervise any and all such open areas to prevent non-customers from gaining access. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-127. - Furnishing alcoholic beverages to intoxicated person.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell, give, provide, distribute, or furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person who is then in an obvious state of intoxication. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-128. - Assisting other in violations.     No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall promote, encourage, or assist any other person in conducting or engaging in any activity or action which is in violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-129. - Misrepresentation of beverages.     No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city, nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall add to or otherwise adulterate the contents of a package or refill any empty package, or in any other manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-130. - Specific rules for consumption on premises. (a)  Rules applicable to all alcoholic beverages. No person who is the holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city or any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises under any of the following circumstances: (1)  Serve multiple servings for a single price or offer all a person can drink for a set price; (2)  Make a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings; (3)  Selling or furnishing alcoholic beverages at reduced prices based upon redemption or surrender of coupons, receipts, or other devices authorizing the serving of alcoholic beverage drinks on a subsequent day; (4)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage is consumed; (5)  Allow or permit any unconsumed alcoholic beverage sold for consumption on the premises to be removed from the licensed premises; (6)  For purposes of this section, the term "special events days" shall mean those certain days generally recognized nationwide as festive or celebratory and specifically approved in advance in writing as such by the chief of police and set forth on a list made available to all holders of on premises consumption alcoholic beverage licenses. For purposes of this section, the term "normal retail price" shall mean the price charged during the majority of the business hours, excluding the hours of 4:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m., of such business for that particular alcoholic beverage during the preceding seven-day period of time. a.  Except for special events days, sell or furnish any alcoholic beverage prior to 4:00 p.m. or after 8:00 p.m. at a price less than the normal retail price of the business in which the associated alcoholic beverage license is utilized. b.  Except for special events days, sell or furnish any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. for less than one-half of the normal retail price. c.  On special events days only, alcoholic beverages may be sold or furnished at any time that the business and, as applicable to distilled spirits, the restaurant is open at any price set by the business so long as such price is not less than one-half of the normal retail price. (7)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of malt beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes which are available at all times that the business in which the alcoholic beverage license is utilized is open for business at the usual, customary or established retail price therefor. (b)  Rules applicable to distilled spirits. In addition to the rules set forth in subsection (a) of this section, these rules shall likewise apply to the on premises consumption of distilled spirits: (1)  Sponsor, conduct, allow or permit contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of distilled spirits on the premises. (2)  Sell or furnish distilled spirits at any time that the restaurant or private club to which such license is attached is closed. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-131. - Operation only by licensee or designated manager.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no holder of any alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall permit or allow any business in which such license is utilized to be managed or operated for any period of time longer than 15 days by any person except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this chapter who is not listed upon the initial application for such license, upon the most recent application for renewal thereof, on an amended application relative thereto which has been approved by the city council, or upon a then pending and unacted upon amended application relative thereto. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-132. - Display of license.     The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all alcoholic beverages licenses by the city and by the state department of revenue. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-133. - Posting of laws regulating sales.     The holder of every alcoholic beverage license issued by the city shall post and prominently display in a conspicuous place upon the premises licensed all notices required by state law relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages as well as such other notice or notices relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to license issued by the city as shall from time to time be prescribed by the city manager of such form, size and content as shall be prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-134. - Obstruction of view of interior of premises and lighting of premises. (a)  For the safety of law enforcement personnel and other public officials, every business in which an alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall provide a door, window or other opening through which the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be visible from the exterior. Neither the holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall obstruct, block, or obscure the view through any door, window or other opening of the interior of the premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. (b)  Both the exterior and interior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be so arranged as to afford an unobstructed view from the outside thereof of the interior portion of the premises which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages. (c)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of all portions of the exterior thereof. (d)  The exterior of all premises licensed by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall at all times be illuminated with sufficient light intensity so as to allow a complete view of the interior of such premises which is utilized for the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person standing on the inside of the entrance of such premises. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-135. - Restrictions on compensation.     No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any such alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall permit or allow any agent, servant or employee of such business who is not the owner of an interest in such business to either directly or indirectly, receive or obtain in any manner any salary or other compensation of any nature whatsoever which is based solely upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises either by or as a result of the efforts of such agent, servant or employee individually or of such business generally or which is based solely upon the profit derived by such business from the sale of any alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-136. - Restrictions on premises rental fees.     It shall be unlawful for an alcoholic beverage license holder to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for the licensed premises is based in whole or in part upon the volume of alcoholic beverages sold upon such premises or based in whole or in part upon the profit derived by such business utilizing the alcoholic beverage license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-137. - Restrictions upon activities of employees.     No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall permit or allow any agent, servant or employee of such business or license holder upon the premises licensed during any period of time that such agent, servant or employee is acting for the benefit of or on behalf of such business or license or is otherwise in the employ of such business or licensee to: (1)  Dance with any customer or patron of such business; (2)  Dance upon any bar, counter or table; and (3)  Consume any alcoholic beverage purchased by a customer or patron of such business. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-138. - Access of police officers and public officials.     No holder of any alcoholic beverage license nor any agent, servant or employee of any business in which any alcoholic beverage license is utilized shall at any time deny or prevent access to the licensed premises, or any portion thereof, to any police officer, to any state or federal or local law enforcement officer or to any local, state or federal building, zoning or fire inspector or official in connection with the conduct of such officer's, inspector's or official's duties or fail or obstruct any such officer, inspector or official in connection with the conduct of any investigation by any such officer, inspector or official with respect to the licensed premises or any activity or conduct upon the licensed premises involving alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-139. - Noise control.     The holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall not allow or permit any customer, patron or other person upon the licensed premises to make, continue or cause to be made any noise that can be heard beyond the property boundary of the licensed premises that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. Moreover, the holder of any alcoholic beverage license shall comply with the noise control provisions of chapter 38 [environment] of this Code. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-140—6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCISE TAXES 
Sec. 6-161. - Excise tax—Malt beverages. (a)  [Rate of levy.] There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12-ounce container or any portion thereof so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes of malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the city, and an excise tax on tap or draft beer in the amount of $6.00 for each container sold, as hereinafter specified, containing not more than 15½ gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts, where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer. (b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. (c)  Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-162. - Excise tax—Wine. (a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of wine, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per wine gallon and in similar proportion for bottles and containers of various sizes. (b)  Against whom levied. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in wine in the city. (c)  Due date and required report. The wine excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of wine sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-162.1. - Excise tax—Distilled spirits. (a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits within the city an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter or portion thereof for each liter of distilled spirits or part thereof sold within the city. (b)  [Due date and required report.] The tax on distilled spirits is levied upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer making the sale on or before the tenth day of the calendar month following the calendar month in which the beverage is sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of distilled spirits sold during the preceding calendar month. (Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 6-5-2014) 
Sec. 6-163. - Monthly reports and payment.     Each holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license shall file a monthly report by the tenth day of each calendar month itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all alcoholic beverages, by nature and by size and type of container, sold within the city and at such time shall remit to the city the amount of excise tax due to the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-164. - Examination of books and records.     The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering these beverages and all retailers thereof in the city shall be subject to inspection and audit by the agents of the city to ensure compliance herewith. It shall be unlawful for any person to deny to any authorized agent of the city reasonable access to its books and records and shall be the duty of each person to keep accurate records of payments and collections of the case tax and remittances. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-165. - Penalties. (a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance required shall render a wholesaler liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the total due during the first 30-day period following the date the report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 50 percent of the amount of this remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which the report and the remittance were not filed, (b)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making the report liable to a penalty equal to 100 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. (c)  Any person, wholesaler or retailer that shall violate the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as prescribed by the municipal court and may in addition be subject to suspension or revocation of the license to sell such beverages. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-166. - Taxes collected upon delivery. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retain these beverages unless he shall have paid the tax thereon. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to sell or deliver these beverages to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with this delivery collect the tax imposed. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of alcoholic beverages to fail to remit to the city, when promptly due, the taxes levied, and collected by the wholesaler. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of these beverages to receive these beverages from another retailer unless tax has been paid. (d)  It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of alcoholic beverages to receive and retail these beverages from another retail store, whether the other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, or whether the other store is located within the corporate limits of the city or not, unless the tax shall have been paid and remitted to the city clerk. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-167. - Tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows:     City means the City of Ashburn and, variously, the incorporated areas of Ashburn, wherein the City of Ashburn is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130.     Due date means [the] 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed.     Finance director means the duly appointed finance director of the City of Ashburn or designee.     Licensee means any person holding a license to serve distilled spirits by the drink from the city.     Monthly period means the calendar months of any year.     Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure (venture), association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax.     Tax means the sales tax on distilled spirits by the drink imposed by this article. (b)  Imposition; rate of tax. There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city. (c)  Collection by licensee. Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at his pouring outlet. (d)  Determination generally; returns; payments. (1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the finance director monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. (2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. (3)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the finance director showing the gross sales of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. (4)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailer and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as now and hereafter amended. (e)  Deficiency determinations. (1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within her possession or that may come into her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. (3)  Notice of determination; service of. The finance director shall give to the licensee written notice of her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee or postal certification that such mail was refused. (4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount in proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (f)  Determination of no return made. (1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (e)(3). (2)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or a fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. (g)  Collection of tax by city. (1)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (2)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If any licensee liable for any amount under this section sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (3)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (4)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the finance director. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. (h)  Administration of ordinance; recordkeeping. (1)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax. (2)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the finance director may prescribe, and in such form as she may require. (3)  Examination of records, audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the finance director may require the filing of reports by person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, the amount of tax collection thereon, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe. (i)  Violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in City Charter section 4.13. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-168. - Delinquency.     If after 45 days any excise tax imposed by this division is not paid by any holder of a wholesale alcoholic beverage license, then the excise tax assessed against such license holder shall become delinquent and all of the provisions of this Code relative to the collection of delinquent taxes shall be applicable for the collection of such excise tax. Alcoholic beverages on which city taxes have not been paid are subject to seizure and may be destroyed or sold by public sale as provided by law. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-169—6-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BROWN BAGGING 
Sec. 6-175. - Defined.     Brown bagging is the allowing of customers to bring into a retail establishment alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-176. - Brown bagging without license.     It shall be unlawful to allow brown bagging in an establishment without first obtaining a license from the city clerk and paying such fees as may be required by the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-177. - License application and requirements.     A brown bagging license shall be issued to qualified applicants as determined by section 6-30 of this chapter of the City Code of Ashburn. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-178. - Display of license.     Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same are issued. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-179. - Building.     No license under this article shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is completed, or unless proposed plans and specifications of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the regulations of the city and the laws of the state. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for a license under this article shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-180. - Qualifications of license.     No license shall be granted under this article to any person unless such person is of legal age and is a resident of Turner County at the time of filing the application for such license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-181. - False statements.     The making of any statement on an application for a license under this article which shall be later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-182. - Submission to clerk-treasurer.     All applications for a license under this article shall be presented to the clerk-treasurer in person. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-183. - Investigation.     Upon receipt by the clerk-treasurer of any application for license under this article or for the transfer of any such license, the clerk-treasurer shall forward the same to the chief of police for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall either approve or disapprove the application and shall attach thereto the entire police record of each person named in such application. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-184. - Submission to council.     The clerk-treasurer shall submit the application with the report of the chief of police attached, with the approval or disapproval of the chief of police indicated thereon, to the city council for action thereon at a regular meeting. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-185. - Procedure for denial or revocation.     The city council may deny, revoke, or suspend a brown bagging license pursuant to sections 6-38 and 6-39 of this chapter of the City Code of the City of Ashburn. 
Sec. 6-186. - License fee.     The fee for a brown bagging license shall be $600.00 for each calendar year. Such fee must accompany the application and shall be either in cash, bank certified check, or cashier's check. Any fee paid for an on premises consumption license shall be deducted from the fee for a brown bagging license. A brown bagging license fee shall be in addition to the business and occupation tax levied as provided in article II of chapter 22 of the City Code of the City Ashburn. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-187. - Transfer or assignment—Generally.     No license under this article shall be transferable or assignable to any person. It shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his/her license to the city council when he/she ceases to operate the business. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-188. - Renewal of license.     Each licensee shall make application in a manner prescribed by the city clerk prior to January 1 of each year. Each application shall be approved by the city council no later than the first regularly scheduled meeting in January. No new applicant for a brown bagging license may allow brown bagging on the premises to be licensed without approval by the council. Applicants for renewal may continue the sale of alcohol beverages until the license application is denied by the mayor and council. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-189. - Inspection.     The business premises of the holder of a brown bagging license under this article shall be open to inspection, by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections, at any and all times that the premises are open or are ordinarily open for business. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-190. - Prohibitions. (a)  No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be in the possession or under the control of any owner, licensee, employee, or agent of such establishment at any time, provided the licensee is not the holder of any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Possession of such bottle or container of alcoholic beverages shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this provision. Bottles or other containers of alcoholic beverages must remain in the possession of or under the control of the person bringing such bottle or container into an establishment permitting brown bagging. (b)  The above regulation shall not apply during legal hours for sale to those establishments holding brown bagging permits which also hold the appropriate consumption-on-the-premises license. (c)  Establishments holding brown bagging permits shall not deny or restrict the privilege of brown bagging by patrons or impose any admission charge, cover charge, or minimum charge on brown bagging patrons that is not also imposed upon all other patrons during the legal hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. (d)  Brown bagging is prohibited at any time after 12:00 midnight on Saturday and on any other day of the week between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Brown bagging shall be prohibited on Sundays, Christmas Day, and any other day upon which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law. (e)  No retailer with a brown bagging license shall operate or allow the congregation of patrons within the premises of said building or the curtilage surrounding such premises, of which the retailer has control, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-191. - Penalties.     A violation under this article shall subject the offender to punishment of incarceration of not more than 180 days or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both and shall subject the offender to revocation of any other business license issued by the city. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-192. - Closing for emergencies. (a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to close any location holding a brown bagging license for a period not in excess of 24 hours if there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbances, or altercation resulting in violation or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety, or morals, when in the judgment of the chief of police such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety, or morals. (b)  The chief of police with the concurrence of the city council, including the mayor, may close any location holding a brown bagging license upon the occurrence of disorders which threaten the public health, welfare, or safety for the duration of the emergency. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-193. - One-day brown bagging license.     A brown bagging license for a period of one day shall be issued to qualified applicants as determined by section 6-30 of this Code. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-194. - Same—Fee.     The license fee for a one-day brown bagging license shall be $25.00. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-195—6-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CATERING 
Sec. 6-200. - Sale off-premises for catering purposes. (a)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. An alcoholic beverages licensee that is also a food caterer may become a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer by meeting all of the following five requirements: (1)  Complying with all provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 3, ch. 11 (sales off-premises for catered functions); and by (2)  Meeting the requirement that at least 50 percent of the gross income for such business comes from the sale of prepared foods as set forth in subsection 6-64(3)b. of this chapter; and by (3)  Applying for an off-premises catering license on the form prescribed by the city; and by (4)  Paying an annual fee to the city for such a license, with such fee being shown upon a schedule of fees maintained in the office of the finance director; and by (5)  Obtaining an event permit, as hereinafter defined and provided, for each and every such authorized catered function to which such alcoholic beverage caterer license shall be applicable.     A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer is eligible to sell or furnish only those types of alcoholic beverages as he can sell or furnish pursuant to his underlying alcoholic beverage license. (b)  An event permit, issued by the city manager or his designee, is required before an otherwise licensed alcoholic beverage caterer can sell or furnish alcoholic beverages off premises, i.e., at any location other than the licensed premises utilizing the underlying alcoholic beverage license. In order to obtain an event permit, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to submit a fully accurate and completed application on the form prescribed by the city which shall include the following information: (1)  Name of caterer; (2)  Date of event; (3)  Time (hours) of event; (4)  Location (address) of event; (5)  Host or sponsor of event; (6)  Estimated number of persons to attend the event that are of legal age; (7)  Estimated number of persons to attend the event that are not of legal age; (8)  Whether "open bar" or "cash bar" of alcoholic beverages at event; (9)  Estimated quantities of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits (to extent authorized by license) to be served at event; (10)  Whether facility is private or public; (11)  Whether location is within 100 yards of a church or school building; (12)  A plat or sketch shall be submitted showing the service area where alcoholic beverages will be served indicating whether said area is within the building or in an open area; (13)  An event fee in an amount shown upon a schedule of fees, not to exceed the amount provided by state law, maintained in the office of the finance director shall be submitted along with the application; (14)  Comply with the reporting provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3; (15)  Provide security and parking enforcement plans and personnel as required by the city. (c)  An event permit cannot be obtained unless the event permit application referenced in subsection (b) hereinabove is accurately completed in full and submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 14 calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the event or function. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager in his sole and sound discretion may issue an event permit within a shorter time frame if the event permit applicant has been previously approved and if the proposed event location has been previously approved. (d)  An event permit may be refused by the city manager or his designee for any one of the following reasons: (1)  Inadequate parking or enforcement personnel at the facility designated; (2)  Criminal record of host or caterer permit holder; (3)  Previous complaints on location or of applicant; (4)  Previous damage to facility by applicant or permit holder. (e)  The city reserves the right to define and/or restrict the service area for serving of alcoholic beverages. (f)  The city shall control the dispensing of alcohol in all of its facilities by requiring the use of a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer if alcohol is furnished at any such facility. Consistent with this article, alcohol may also be dispensed by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who has been issued an event permit at facilities of any local, state or federal public entity. (g)  Violation. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any food caterer or person to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business without a license issued pursuant to this section. (2)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this section to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine off-premises except in connection with an authorized catered function for which an event permit has been obtained. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Secs. 6-201—6-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LOITERING 
Sec. 6-211. - Loitering prohibited.     It shall be an offense punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code for any person or persons to remain outside the building for more than five minutes of a premises licensed for on-premises consumption. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Sec. 6-212. - Congregating prohibited.     It shall be an offense punishable as provided in section 1-12 of this Code for any person or persons to congregate outside any building or building portion of a premises licensed for on-premises consumption. The term "congregate" as used herein means any assembly of two or more persons who remain in company with each other for more than five minutes, or who cause a disturbance, or violate any federal or state laws of local ordinances. (Ord. No. 2012-07, § 2(Exh. A), 12-6-2012) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61. 
Sec. 10-31. - Purpose.     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this chapter represents a balancing of competing interests: Reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions.     The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below:     Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult business means either: (1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult store means a commercial establishment or other establishment which has a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its stock in trade or derives a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion (20 percent or more) of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental, or any form of consideration of any instruments, devices, paraphernalia, products, article or articles which are designed, sold, or viewed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or which are sold or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs.     Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the same or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized, distinguished, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Church means a temple or building consecrated to the honor of God or other supreme being and religion or an assembly of persons united by the profession of the same religious faith, meeting together routinely for religious worship.     Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble, or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing, or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for person who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime in the past five years.     Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.     Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation, or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or (2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; or (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the inflicting of pain; or (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.     An establishment may have other principle business purposes that do not involve the activities defined herein and still be categorized or classified as an adult entertainment establishment under this portion of the Code. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult entertainment establishment herein so long as one of the principle business purposes is defined in this Code. A principle business purpose need not be a primary use of an establishment so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or activity of the establishment. State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 10-33. - Regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this chapter. (b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment applicant shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the applicant's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  An adult entertainment establishment applicant shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment applicant shall employ or contract with, as a dancer, a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. (e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, shall be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays and 2:55 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. (g)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. (h)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. State Law reference— Local authority to regulate, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 10-34. - Certain activities prohibited.     No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
Sec. 10-35. - Occupation tax certificate required.     It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to engage in, conduct, or carry on, in, or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments, defined in this chapter, without an occupation tax certificate so to do. No occupation tax certificate so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. State Law reference— Local authority to impose occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 10-36. - Operation of unregulated premises unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, or adult business or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid occupation tax certificate or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
Sec. 10-37. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for an applicant to admit or permit the admission of minors within a regulated premises. 
Sec. 10-38. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It is unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or give to any minor any service, material, device, or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor, adult dancing establishment, or other adult entertainment facility. 
Sec. 10-39. - Location.     No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: (1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multi-family or single family uses or purposes; (2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park, or neighborhood playground is located; (3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; (4)  Within the central business district of the city per map on file with the planning department; (5)  Within any zoning category or district other than an adult zoning district (C-A); (6)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used, or to be used, as a unit; (7)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages; (8)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a day care center or child care facility is operated. 
Sec. 10-40. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. (a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character, as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty. The terms "employed as an adult use establishment employee" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. (b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a regulated premises, he/she shall file a notice with the permitting officer of his/her intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. The city shall have 15 days to investigate the information required by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the permitting officer shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. Within ten days following the hearing, the prospective employee may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council who shall issue such order as is required. The decision of the city council may thereafter be appealed, within 30 days, to Turner County Superior Court. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the permitting officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. (c)  Suspension, revocation of permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. (d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or applicant of any adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 10-41. - Application for occupation tax certificate. (a)  Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to obtain an occupation tax certificate to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the mayor or city council of the city or the designee of the mayor or city council. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable processing fee of $1,000.00 shall be paid to the business license manager to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The business license manager shall issue a receipt showing that such processing fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the mayor or the city council at the time such application is submitted. (b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. (c)  A copy of the application shall be posted on the premises for which the application is sought. 
Sec. 10-42. - Application contents.     Each application for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall contain the following information: (1)  The applicant's full true name. (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. (4)  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors, and officers of a corporation. (5)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory under license, has had such license or occupation tax certificate for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. (7)  If the applicant, any partners, or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime involving good moral character in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. (8)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. (9)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers, or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the occupation tax certificate is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The business license manager shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. (10)  Address of the premises to be regulated. (11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. (12)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises is not inconsistent with the provisions contained in section 10-39 which provide that no adult business or use restricted shall be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family use or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park, or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; within any zoning category other than industrial or general commercial; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a day care center or child-care facility is operated. (13)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; c.  If a corporation, by the present of the corporation; d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
Sec. 10-43. - Applicant to appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
Sec. 10-44. - Application—Investigation.     The city shall have up to 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit at its next regular meeting if it finds: (1)  The required fee has been paid. (2)  Application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. (6)  Applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause involving moral character in this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment, or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws. (8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. (9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. (10)  That on the date the business for which an occupation tax certificate is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single family uses or purposes; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, neighborhood public park, or neighborhood playground is located; within 1,000 feet of any parcel upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located within any zoning category other than industrial or general commercial; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which an establishment is licensed to sell any form of alcoholic beverages; within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a day care center or child-care facility is operated. (12)  That the grant of such occupation tax certificate will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Ashburn, the State of Georgia, or the United States. 
Sec. 10-45. - Persons prohibited as applicants. (a)  No occupation tax certificate provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. (3)  Any corporation, any of whose directors are not of good moral character. (4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members are not of good moral character. (5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or the City of Ashburn. 
Sec. 10-46. - Occupation tax certificate—Refusal, appeal.     If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of the application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall within ten days, notify applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an occupation tax certificate may appeal such denial to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk. A hearing before the mayor and council shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
Sec. 10-47. - Occupation tax certificate.     Occupation tax certificates for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. Renewal applications shall be due by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. 
Sec. 10-48. - Occupation tax certificates nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the applicant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such occupation tax certificate, and in such case, the occupation tax certificate upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment occupation tax certificate issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a permit, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of an occupation tax certificate is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
Sec. 10-49. - Change of location or name. (a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its occupation tax certificate until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the mayor and council for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's Codes, have been met. (b)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manager, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his occupation tax certificate. (c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
Sec. 10-50. - Appeal procedure. (a)  The applicant shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. (b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. (c)  The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five not more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
Sec. 10-51. - Appeal—Council determines procedure.     When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: (1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. (2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
Sec. 10-52. - City council hearing.     Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, over-rule, or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
Sec. 10-53. - Powers of hearing officer.     The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedures set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath, and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
Sec. 10-54. - Rules of evidence inapplicable.     The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
Sec. 10-55. - Hearing officer—Report. (a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings, conclusions, and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. (b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city council and the chief of police. (c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
Sec. 10-56. - Hearing officer report—Action by council.     The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: (1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, and, in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. (2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
Sec. 10-57. - Penalty for violation.     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine and/or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate issued hereunder. 
Sec. 10-58. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate granted hereunder. 
Sec. 10-59. - Revocation and appeal. (a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an occupation tax certificate, the chief of police shall give written notification to the applicant of such action, and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. (b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an occupation tax certificate in the event of any one or more of the following: (1)  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; (2)  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; (3)  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; (4)  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; (5)  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime by the State of Georgia or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; and (6)  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation tax fine, or other amount of money due the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance of the city. (c)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any occupation tax certificate hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. No applicant may apply for an occupation tax certificate during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted, and the testimony presented in making any decision on suspension, revocation, and the duration of either. (d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After the hearing by the mayor and council, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the Superior Court of Turner County filed within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
Sec. 10-60. - Occupation tax certificate and annual renewal fees.     The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax and any renewal fee for such occupation tax certificate shall be based on the schedule contained in the ordinance providing for the issuance of business and occupation tax certificates. 
Sec. 10-61. - Change of location.     There is established an administrative fee of $10.00 to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
Sec. 10-62. - Alcoholic beverages—Prohibitions, exceptions. (a)  No person, association, partnership, or corporation licensed under this chapter of the City Code of the City of Ashburn after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, or wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. (b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, or ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums, or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41. 
Sec. 10-63. - Severability.     If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50. State Law reference— Dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq.; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abused animal means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented, or teased; or is deprived of water, food, or shelter; or is kept under unsanitary conditions; or is abandoned; or is trained for fighting other animals.     Animal means a multicellular organism of the kingdom Animalia differing from plants in certain typical characteristics, such as a capacity for locomotion, nonphotosynthetic metabolism, pronounced response to stimuli, restricted growth, and fixed bodily structure.     Animal control officer means a person charged by the city manager with enforcing this chapter.     At heel means a condition in which an animal is in the immediate vicinity of its owner and clearly under the voice control of that person and that control is clearly being exerted.     At-large. An animal shall be deemed at large when the animal is in any public street, right-of-way, park, or other public grounds, or when off the premises of the owner or person who has custody of the animal, and not under restraint or under the immediate control (at heel) of the owner or the person who has custody of the animal.     Cat means a feline of whatever breed and all ages.     Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to the records of the county sheriff's department, the city police department, and any other department or agency with jurisdiction in the incorporated areas of the city: (1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after adoption of this chapter; or (2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner had been notified of such classification.     Dog means a canine of whatever breed and all ages.     Dog control officer means an individual selected by the city pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of article VI of this chapter.     Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon and within which he is located.     Harboring. The occupant of any premises on which an animal is kept or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care for a period of ten days or more is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal.     Humane manner means care of an animal, to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water which are consistent with the normal requirements and breeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed.     Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, training, or boarding animals.     Nuisance. An animal shall be hereby declared to be a public nuisance if it: (1)  Damages, defiles, or defecates on private property other than that of the owner of the animal or on public property (unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner); (2)  Causes an unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive condition; (3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; (4)  Chases vehicles; (5)  Molests, attacks, or interferes with persons, other domesticated animals, or livestock; (6)  Does not have proof of rabies inoculation clearly displayed, if required; (7)  Is trained, owned, or harbored for the purpose, primary or in part, of animal fighting; or is contrary to the public health, welfare, or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the city, which rules and regulations are incorporated in this section and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be treated accordingly.     Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal within the city limits.     Poison means a substance that through its chemical action usually kills, injures, or impairs an organism.     Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that bites a human being without provocation on either public or private property. Dogs which merely chase someone or act aggressively need not be classified as potentially dangerous. Dogs used by law enforcement officers, or dogs who attack in response to torment, abuse, or assault, are exempt from this classification.     Pound means those premises designated by the city council for the purpose of holding and caring for animals found to be at large by those persons charged with the enforcement of these regulations.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owners property securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed with a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.     Rabies vaccination means inoculation of an animal with an approved rabies vaccine.     Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.     Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead not to exceed six feet in length and held by a responsible, able-bodied person. (Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 4.01, 4.02, 4-5-2001) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-21, 4-8-41, and 4-14-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Purpose.     The public health, safety, good order, and general welfare of the citizens of the city require the control of animals within the city. This chapter provides for that control and provides the procedure for accomplishing that control. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.80, 4-5-2001) 
Sec. 14-3. - Jurisdiction.     The provisions in this chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated areas of the city. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.81, 4-5-2001) 
Sec. 14-4. - Prohibited conditions. (a)  No person shall allow any animal over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if the same shall constitute a nuisance as defined in this chapter. (b)  In city zoning districts, except SA suburban agriculture, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen or enclosure for any animal within 25 feet of any property line. This subsection is intended to apply to kennels, pens, and other enclosures. Fenced or walled yards are not required to have such fence or wall setback 25 feet from property. A perimeter fence is not affected by the 25-foot minimum setback. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.34, 4-5-2001) 
Sec. 14-5. - Dead animals. (a)  Removal from public rights-of-way. The owner of dead animals upon the public rights-of-way shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so, the city shall remove such carcass from the public rights-of-way and dispose of same and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of the carcass, if known. (b)  Abandonment upon public property or public rights-of-way. No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the animal is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and had been designated by the city as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse. (c)  Removal from private property. When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately and shall be responsible for all costs of such removal. Failure to do so in a timely manner is hereby declared a nuisance and constitutes a violation of this chapter. (d)  Abandonment upon private property. No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being left. (Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 4.13—4.16, 4-5-2001) 
Secs. 14-6—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 14-31. - General rules.     For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning indicated herein. Unless the context requires otherwise, words used in the present tense include the future. All definitions shall be applicable equally to the singular and the plural, and to the male and female form of such terms. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sec. 14-32. - Word definitions.     Abused animal means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented, or teased; or is deprived of water, food, or shelter; or is kept under unsanitary conditions; or is abandoned; or is trained for fighting other animals.     Animal means a multicellular organism of the kingdom Animalia differing from plants in certain typical characteristics, such as a capacity for locomotion, nonphotosynthetic metabolism, pronounced response to stimuli, restricted growth, and fixed bodily structure.     Animal control officer means the person(s) charged by the city manager with enforcing this article.     At heel means a condition in which an animal is in the immediate vicinity of its owner and clearly under the voice control of that person and that control is clearly being exerted.     At-large means an animal shall be deemed at large when the animal is in any public street, right-of-way, park or other public grounds, or when off the said premises of the owner or person who has custody of said animal, and not under restraint or under the immediate control (at heel) of the owner or the person who has custody of said animal.     Cat means a feline of whatever breed and all ages.     Court means the Municipal Court of the City of Ashburn.     Dangerous dogs means any dog that, according to the records of the Turner County Sheriff's Department, the City of Ashburn Police Department, and any other department or agency with jurisdiction in the incorporated areas of the city: (1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property at any time after adoption of this article; or (2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner had been notified of such classification.     Dog means a canine of whatever breed and all ages.     Dog control officer means an individual selected by a local government pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Article VII of this ordinance.     Governing authority means the Ashburn City Council.     Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon and within which he is located.     Harboring means the occupant of any premises on which an animal is kept or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care for a period of ten days or more is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal.     Humane manner means care of an animal to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water which are consistent with the normal requirements, and breeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed.     Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, training, or boarding animals.     Local government means Ashburn, Georgia.     Nuisance means an animal shall be hereby declared to be a public nuisance if it: damages, defiles, or defecates on private property other than that of the owner of the animal or on public property (unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner); causes an unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive condition; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise making; chases vehicles; molests, attacks, or interferes with persons, other domesticated animals, or livestock; does not have proof of rabies inoculation clearly displayed, if required; is trained, owned, or harbored for the purpose, primary or in part, of animal fighting; or is contrary to the public health, welfare, or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the city, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein. Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be treated accordingly.     Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal within the city limits of the City of Ashburn.     Poison means a substance that through its chemical action usually kills, injures, or impairs an organism.     Potentially dangerous dogs means any dog that is kept or housed within the corporate limits of the City of Ashburn and that, without provocation, bites or attempts to bite, aggressively pursues, chases, lunges toward, or otherwise attempts to make physical conduct with a person in a public or private location or exhibits such other behavior which reasonably suggests or may be intepreted as a proclivity to attack, bite, or cause harm to any individual. For the purposes of this definition, barking alone without some other manner of aggressive behavior will not serve as a basis for classification as potentially dangerous.     Pound means those premises designated by the city council for the purpose of holding and caring for animals found to be at large by those persons charged with the enforcement of these regulations.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owners property, securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed with a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.     Rabies vaccination means inoculation of an animal with an approved rabies vaccine.     Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death.     Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead not to exceed six feet in length and held by a responsible, able-bodied person. (Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 3-3-2011) 
Secs. 14-33—14-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Sec. 14-40. - Rights of officials to enter premises. (a)  Whenever an animal control officer, a representative from the Turner County Health Department or its authorized representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city or county official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this article or other applicable law, or whenever it is necessary for such official to make an inspection to enforce any provisions or perform any duty imposed by this article or any other applicable law, such person shall have the right to enter such property at any reasonable time to inspect and perform any duty imposed by this article or another applicable law; provided, that: (1)  If such property be occupied, such person entering shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reason therefor; and (2)  If such property be unoccupied, such person entering shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining the reason therefor; and (3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, recourse shall be had to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the property. (b)  Nothing in this section shall affect or otherwise abridge the right of any animal control officer to pursue or impound an animal or to issue a citation when an animal is on property other than that of the owner of the animal or that of a person who has a right to control such animal. 
Sec. 14-41. - Rights of officials for emergency entry.     If an animal control officer, health department representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city or county official has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe, or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to save the animal or protect the public health or safety, such person shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property and may use reasonable means required to effect such entry and make inspection whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property be occupied, such person shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection. Failure or refusal to permit inspection hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 14-42. - Interference with officials prohibited.     No person shall resist or interfere with an animal control officer or any other city or county official in the performance of his/her official duty in enforcing this article; nor shall any person fail or refuse to exhibit the vaccination certificate of any animal required to be vaccinated by this article when required to do so by any animal control officer or other city or county official. 
Sec. 14-43. - Dead animals—Removal from public rights-of-way.     The owner of dead animals upon the public rights-of-way shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so, the city shall remove such carcass from the public rights-of-way and dispose of same and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner or the carcass, if known. 
Sec. 14-44. - Abandonment of dead animals upon public property or public rights-of way.     No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the animal is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and had been designated by the city as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse. 
Sec. 14-45. - Dead animals—Removal from private property.     When any animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately and shall be responsible for all costs of such removal. Failure to do so in a timely manner is hereby declared a nuisance and constitutes a violation of this article. 
Sec. 14-46. - Abandonment of dead animals upon private property.     No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being left. 
Sec. 14-47. - Livestock on public rights-of-way.     No one shall allow or permit any horses, mules, cattle, hogs, poultry, fowl, sheep, goats, or other livestock to run at large on public rights-of-way or to be staked, tied, guarded, or minded so that they can go upon public rights-of-way; or to drive or lead any such animals along or on the public rights-of-way unless fastened to a rope, chain, or other substantial leading device, which such device is securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals are being led or drive along and over the public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 14-48. - Abandonment of animals.     No person shall release an animal on any public or private property with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
Sec. 14-49. - Liability of owner or custodian for damages to livestock and poultry by an animal. (a)  The owner, or if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any animal which goes upon land of another and causes injury, death, or damage directly or indirectly to any livestock or poultry shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock or poultry for damages, death, or injury caused by the animal. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog shall include consequential damages. (b)  This section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to do away with or limit other causes of an action which might inure to the owner of any livestock or poultry. 
Sec. 14-50. - Permitting animals in heat to roam or run free.     No owner or custodian of any animal in heat shall permit the animal to roam free. Such animal shall be confined in a building or securely enclosed in a manner that shall not allow contact with a non-neutered male animal except for planned breeding. 
Secs. 14-51—14-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONFINEMENT, VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS, AND PROHIBITED CONDITIONS 
Sec. 14-60. - At-large animals constitute a nuisance. (a)  No person owning, having an interest in, harboring, or having the care, charge, control, or possession of any animal shall permit or allow it (either willfully or through failure to exercise due care of control) to be, remain, go, or run at large upon a public right-of-way, park or other public space, or any open lot of land in the city other than on the property of the said animal's owner. The presence of any animal upon a public right-of-way, park or other public space, or upon any open lot or land in the City other than on the property of the said animal's owner, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety. (b)  An animal shall not be considered to be at large if such animal is under restraint as defined in this division or if such animal is upon private property which is in the possession (through ownership, lease, or other similar arrangement) of a person or persons who either own or have control of the said animal or it is on or in a vehicle. (c)  All animals found to be in violation of this division may be impounded in the manner prescribed in this division. 
Sec. 14-61. - Vaccination of animals required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any canine or feline which has not been vaccinated against rabies as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. Evidence of such vaccination shall consist of a certificate bearing the owner's name and address, number of vaccination tag issued, date of vaccination, date the animal shall be re-vaccinated, type and lot number of the vaccine administered, and the signature of the person administering the vaccine. The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original given to the owner, the first copy filed in the office of the Turner County Board of Health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine. All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Georgia or by another person qualified under state law for that purpose. State Law reference— Power and duty of local governments in the control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 14-62. - Proof of vaccination.     Animals required to be vaccinated under section 14-61 above shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year in a clearly visible location. 
Sec. 14-63. - Display of vaccination certificate upon demand.     No person keeping or harboring an animal shall fail or refuse to exhibit a certificate of vaccination required by this division upon demand of the animal control officer, health department representative, sheriff, or any other city or county official. 
Sec. 14-64. - Prohibited conditions. (a)  No person shall allow any animal over which they have custody or control to remain on this property or premises if the same shall constitute a nuisance as defined in this division. (b)  In city zoning districts, except SA, suburban agriculture, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen or enclosure for any animal within 25 feet of any property line. This paragraph is intended to apply to kennels, pens, and other enclosures. Fenced or walled yards are not required to have such fence or wall setback 25 feet from property. Perimeter fence is not affected by the 25-foot minimum setback. 
Secs. 14-65—14-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3 et seq.; dogs in heat running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; county pounds, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-11. 
Sec. 14-70. - Impoundment of animals running at-large. (a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this article and impound such animals in the animal shelter designated by the city council. (b)  All animals impounded by the city shall be held until claimed by the owner or a minimum of four calendar days to include the day the animal was impounded, whichever comes first. Longer periods of custody may be used if in the opinion of the holding agency personnel the animal is likely to be claimed by its owner or a new owner will be found, provided that in either case there is a reasonable expectation that the fees, fines, or other charges provided for herein will be paid. (c)  Any animal not claimed within the times provided above shall become the property of the agency serving as the city's animal shelter to dispose of humanely in accordance with their regulations and policies. (d)  In lieu of impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, upon determining the owner, may return the animal to the owner (if able to apprehend said animal) and issue a summons requiring the owner to appear in the court of jurisdiction for violation of this article. Said summons may be issued without apprehending the animal if the owner of said animal can be identified. (e)  It shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to make reasonable efforts to ascertain the owner of each impounded animal as soon as possible after taking it into custody. If the owner is identified, a reasonably expeditious effort shall be made to notify said owner of the impoundment of the animal and make the owner aware of the city's animal control laws, the period of impounding, charges to be made, and any fees owed the city. 
Sec. 14-71. - Reclamation of impounded animals. (a)  Any person may make application to the city for the return of any animal impounded therein and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to the city that such person is rightly entitled to the possession of such animal may recover it upon presentation of a $25.00 impoundment fee plus fees to be fixed by agreement between the city council and said agency, together with the reasonable expense of the animal's keep. The agency shall retain any fees collected by it under this section. The city shall retain the $25.00 impoundment fee. (b)  No animal shall be released to a potential new owner prior to the end of the impoundment period stipulated in section 14-70, paragraph (b). (c)  If, after consultation with a licensed veterinarian, an animal is determined to have a terminal illness, a potentially lethal wound or (in the case of an animal whose owner has not been identified) a communicable disease, such animal shall be disposed of by humane methods without regard to the specified holding period. (d)  Enforcement personnel following the procedures proscribed in this division shall not be held liable for the disposal of any animal. 
Sec. 14-72. - Proof of rabies vaccine required prior to release.     No animal required to be vaccinated for rabies shall be released from impoundment prior to showing proof of a current rabies inoculation. If said animal has not had a current rabies vaccine or it cannot be shown that it has a current rabies vaccine, the animal shall be vaccinated prior to being released. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the costs of the vaccination. 
Sec. 14-73. - Physical facilities. (a)  The animal shelter for the City of Ashburn shall be located at a place or agency designated by the city council. (b)  The facilities shall be constructed so as to provide security for the citizens of the surrounding area and for the animals under impoundment. (c)  Facilities for sanitary storage of feed and secure storage of medicines and other chemicals shall be provided. (d)  Facilities for the humane destruction of animals or fowl and the appropriate means for disposal of the remains shall be provided. 
Sec. 14-74. - Care of animals under impoundment.     Animals under impoundment shall be treated in a humane manner. They shall be provided reasonable protection from extremes in weather. Animals suspected of having a communicable disease shall be isolated from the remainder of the animal population. Each animal shall be fed an adequate amount of food at least once per day and shall have fresh water available at all reasonable times. 
Sec. 14-75. - Records.     Records shall be kept at the pound and will, at a minimum, include a description of each animal, the date and time it was taken into custody, notations as to efforts to identify and notify the owner, rabies inoculation status, and any other pertinent medical information, to whom released, the charges assessed and by whom laid, and if not released, the date of disposal. 
Sec. 14-76. - Impoundment fees.     The city council may establish fees for the apprehension of any animals running at large, for the impoundment of animals at the county animal shelter, for the redemption of animals impounded under the provisions of this article and for the disposal of animals not claimed or adopted. Such fees shall be sufficient for the city to recover the costs incurred in the administration of this article. These fees, if any, shall be in addition to any fee charged to the animal owner by the veterinary serving as the City of Ashburn animal shelter or any fine assessed by the Court for violations of this article. 
Secs. 14-77—14-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PROTECTION AGAINST RABIES 
Sec. 14-90. - Report of animal bite required.     It shall be the duty of every person bitten by an animal to report immediately to the Turner County Health Department giving his full name, age, and address; the circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite; the medical treatment given; and the name and address of the owner or custodian of the animal. 
Sec. 14-91. - Report of animal bite required by owner of animal.     It shall be the duty of every person owning or having custody of an animal which has bitten a human being to report the same to the Turner County Health Department and confine the animal in a secure enclosure for observation and examination by the animal control officer and/or representatives of the Turner County Health Department. No person having the custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse, or neglect to immediately notify the city, or shall fail, refuse, or neglect to allow the animal control official and/or a representative from the Turner County Health Department to make an inspection or examination of such animal for the purpose of determining whether such animal has rabies. 
Sec. 14-92. - Bite report required by those providing care.     It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the Turner County Health Department the full name, age, and address of any person under his care or observation who has been bitten by an animal in the city. If no physician is in attendance and the person is a child, it shall be the duty of the parent or guardian to make such report immediately. If the person is an adult, such person shall make the report, or if incapacitated, it shall be made by whoever is caring for the person bitten. 
Sec. 14-93. - Reporting animals suspected of having rabies.     It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the Turner County Health Department and the city the existence and description of such animal; the place where seen; the owner's name, if know; and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
Sec. 14-94. - Reporting of suspected rabies cases by owners.     Whenever the owner or person having custody or possession of any animal shall observe or learn that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies or has acted in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it might have rabies, such owner or person shall immediately notify the city and shall allow the animal control officer and/or a representative of the Turner County Health Department to make an inspection or examination of such animal until it shall be established that such animal does or does not have rabies. 
Sec. 14-95. - Disposition of body of suspected rabies cases.     It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of any animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of the animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be requested, to the animal control officer after the death of the animal. 
Sec. 14-96. - Veterinarian to quarantine suspected rabies cases.     All veterinarians treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies shall hold such animal in quarantine until the disposition of said animal by the animal control officer. 
Sec. 14-97. - Report of animal biting animal required.     It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of any animal that bites another animal to report immediately to the Turner County Health Department the existence and description of such animal; the owner's name, if known; the place where the biting incident occurred; a description of the bitten animal; and the name of its owner, if known. 
Sec. 14-98. - Management of animals that scratch or bite humans. (a)  Dogs and cats. A healthy dog or cat that bites or scratches a person or another animal should be confined and observed for ten days. This required quarantine applies to dogs and cats only. Rabies vaccine should not be administered during the observation period. While in confinement, any signs of illness should be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. The place of confinement shall be at the veterinarian clinic or agency designated by the city as the animal shelter at the expense of the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal, the veterinarian chosen by the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal at said owner's expense, or any other confinement location so designated and approved by the city. If symptoms suggestive of rabies are observed, the animal should be humanely killed, and a specimen should be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the specimen should be submitted immediately for rabies testing. (b)  Stray domestic animals and other species. Any stray or unwanted animal that bites or scratches a person or domestic animal may be humanely euthanized and a specimen submitted for testing. Animals other than dogs or cats that bite or scratch a person and are suspected of being rabid should immediately be reported to the Turner County Health Department. Management of animals other than dogs and cats is dependent on the animal species, the circumstances of the bite, and the epidemiology of rabies in the area and shall be at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer or the Turner County Health Department or their authorized representative. (c)  Livestock. Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, swine, and sheep are not likely to be carriers of rabies. Treatment will be weighed against the circumstances of exposure by the animal control officer or the Turner County Health Department or their authorized representative. If at the time of exposure the animal is clinically ill with signs suggestive of rabies, the animal control officer or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative from the Turner County Health Department will immediately and humanely kill the animal and a specimen will be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. The cost of testing will be the responsibility of the animal owner, if known. 
Sec. 14-99. - Management of animals exposed to rabies.     Any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal (particularly bobcat, raccoon, fox, skunk, or coyote) which is not available for testing should be considered exposed to rabies. (1)  Unvaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner or the animal is unwilling to have this done (upon approval of the Department Head of Turner County Health Department and the City of Ashburn) the exposed animal must be placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The responsibility for isolation of an exposed unvaccinated animal remains with the owner. The animal must be kept in a pen that has been built to the specifications of the State of Georgia Rabies Control Manual Appendix "C", and approved by the Department Head of Turner County Health Department and the City of Ashburn. Additionally, a second fence 18—24 inches in distance from the inner pen must be erected around the perimeter to guarantee complete isolation of the quarantined animal from other animals and human contact. The total construction costs of this confinement area is the sole responsibility of the pet owner. Previously vaccinated dogs and cats whose rabies vaccination has lapsed from more than 30 days are considered unvaccinated and will be treated as such. (2)  Vaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated (vaccinated at least one month prior to exposure) should be re-vaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by Turner County Health Department. (3)  Livestock exposed to rabies. Vaccinated livestock (vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a USDA approved vaccine for that species at least 30 days prior to the attack) bitten by a rabid animal should be re-vaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by Turner County Health Department. (4)  Other animals exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated animals bitten by a rabid animal should be euthanized immediately. If an animal has been vaccinated with a USDA approved vaccine for that species, the animal must be re-vaccinated immediately and placed in confinement for a minimum of 90 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by Turner County Health Department. 
Sec. 14-100. - Quarantine of area of city.     Whenever in the judgment of the city council, after consultation with the Turner County Health Department, the public health and safety so require, the council shall declare and establish a quarantine zone or area consisting of the whole or any part of the city and maintain such quarantine therein until such time as they may deem it advisable to lift the same. During the existence of such quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations proscribed by the city council with reference to such quarantine. 
Sec. 14-101. - Retention of animals suspected of having rabies. (a)  If the animal control officer or pound keeper operating a pound for the city suspects that any animal impounded has rabies, he or she shall notify the Turner County Animal Control Department. A qualified veterinarian shall examine such animal and if they believe such animal should be held for future observation, they shall so inform the animal control officer. (b)  If an animal is found to be afflicted with rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating the pound for the city shall confine said animal as directed. (c)  If an animal does not have rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating a pound for the city shall release it or dispose of it in the manner proscribed in this division. 
Sec. 14-102. - Animal exposed to rabies barred from city.     No person shall bring any animal into the city in which rabies has been present within six months prior thereto. 
Secs. 14-103—14-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CRUELTY AND NEGLECT TO ANIMALS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Local authority to adopt ordinances for animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18; dog fights, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37. 
Sec. 14-120. - Cruelty and neglect to animals prohibited.     No animal in the incorporated areas of the city shall be subject to cruelty and/or neglect as outlined in this section. (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform a cruel act on any animal; nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any domestic animal, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: a.  Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or b.  Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry. (2)  The method used for killing the animal in the situations outlined in item (1) above shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in item (1) of this article shall incur no liability for such death. (3)  This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer or animal control officer. (4)  It shall be the duty of the animal owner, caretaker, or possessor to provide adequate shelter, food, water, and sanitary conditions at all times; and to provide necessary medical care including, but not limited to, the required annual rabies inoculation. Failure to comply with this section constitutes neglect and is a violation of this division. (5)  When harnessed all animals shall be harnessed in such a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, and the animal shall be given plenty of room on a harness to exercise. (6)  Any violation of this section shall be enforced as outlined in division 8 of this article. 
Sec. 14-121. - Confiscation of suspected abused animals.     If an animal control officer and/or any law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is subject to abuse as defined in this division, he shall confiscate and impound the animal pending the conclusion of an investigation. Said investigation shall be completed by the end of the seventh business day, at which time a finding shall be issued by the animal control officer. If a finding is made that the animal is being abused, cruelty to animal charges shall be filed against the owner and the animal will become the property of the city. In the event that a determination is reached that the animal is not being abused, the animal will be returned to its owner, and follow-up investigations may be conducted by the animal control officer at the discretion of the animal control officer. The responsibility for costs related to the confiscation and impoundment during the investigation will rest with the owner, regardless of the determination reached. 
Sec. 14-122. - Protection of city officials, citizens, and animals.     Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14-120, any animal found at large in violation of this article, which cannot be safely impounded or poses a real threat to city officials, citizens, other domesticated animals, or livestock, may be slain by any police officer or animal control officer. Such measures shall only be used when tranquilizing the animal fails or there is a significant risk of immediate danger. 
Secs. 14-123—14-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
Sec. 14-130. - Dangerous dogs—Generally.     This division 7 of the animal control ordinance is passed under the authority of and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et seq. The purpose of this article is to clearly define local government responsibility, as well as limit the administrative and liability burdens upon the city, with regard to potentially dangerous and dangerous dogs.     A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog within the meaning of this article. A dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a potentially [dangerous] dog within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
Sec. 14-131. - Designation of a dog control officer.     The Animal Control Officer of Turner County, Georgia shall also be designated as the "dog control officer" for purposes of division 7 of the animal control ordinance. It shall be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify as appropriate suspected dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs. It shall be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify when any report of an occurrence involving a dog that is kept or housed or lives permanently within the corporate limits of the City of Ashburn which warrants or may warrant classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is received whether that incident is alleged to have taken place within the corporate limits, within Turner County, or in some other jurisdiction. (Ord. No. 11-03, § 2, 3-3-2011) 
Sec. 14-132. - Responsibilities of dog control officer. (a)  Upon receiving a report that a dog has acted in a dangerous or potentially dangerous manner, the dog control officer shall investigate the allegations and make a determination as to the truthfulness of said allegations. After concluding the investigation, the dog control officer shall: (1)  Decide the classification of the dog as dangerous or potentially dangerous is not required; (2)  Classify the dog as potentially dangerous; or (3)  Classify the dog as dangerous. (b)  In the event that the dog control officer classifies the dog under investigation as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous," the dog control officer must notify the owner(s) by certified mail. The notice shall include a summary of the reason for which the animal has been classified and provide the owners with a form to request a hearing to contest the classification within 15 days of the notice date. If no hearing is requested, the dog's classification goes into effect on the fifteenth day. (c)  An owner who requests a hearing shall be provided a hearing before the city council within 30 days. The owners must be notified of the hearing date, time, and location by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted such that owners have the opportunity to present their testimony, cross examine witnesses, and present evidence. The city council shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as is reasonably necessary to make a determination to either sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the hearing, the city council shall make a final determination as to the classification of the dog and provide notice of its determination by certified mail to the owners. In the event that the city council, after a hearing, classifies a dog as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous," the effective date of such classification, which shall be the date the decision is made, must be given. 
Sec. 14-133. - Animal owner responsibilities. (a)  The owner of any dog which has been classified as "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous" must register said dog with the city on an annual basis. Failure to register a "dangerous" or "potentially dangerous" dog on an annual basis shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog or dogs by the dog control officer. In order to obtain registration or re-registration of such an animal, owners must present or provide evidence to the dog control officer of the following requirements: (1)  Proof of proper enclosure adequate to confine the dog, i.e., a pen, fence, or structure that prevents the dog from escaping and children from coming into contact with the dog. The enclosure must also protect the dog from the elements; (2)  Proof that uniform warning sign is present on the owner's premises. The warning sign may be obtained from the Department of Natural Resources and shall be available through the city. Dog owner signs must conform to the department of Natural Resources Uniform Design; (3)  For dangerous dogs only, liability insurance of at least $15,000.00; (4)  For dangerous dogs only, a surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00. (b)  A person applying for registration or re-registration of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee of $100.00. (c)  Owners of classified dogs must notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a person, has died, or been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. Failure to so notify the dog control officer shall be grounds for confiscation of said dog. (d)  An owner of a classified dog shall keep the dog in a proper enclosure unless restrained by a strong leash and accompanied by a responsible person. Dangerous dogs when not adequately enclosed must also be muzzled when outside the enclosure. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. Violation of this provision, in addition to constituting a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (e)  An owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer when moving from the jurisdiction of the city. Failure of the owner to comply with this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor hereunder shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (f)  Any owner of a dog which has been classified as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or similarly classified, in another jurisdiction within this state must notify the Dog Control Officer of Turner County within ten days of residency. Violation of this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (g)  Any owner of a dog meeting the classification requirements hereunder moving into the city from outside the State of Georgia must notify the dog control officer within 30 days of residency. Violation of this provision, in addition to being a misdemeanor, shall be grounds for confiscation of the dog. (h)  The dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. (i)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by Turner County does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
Sec. 14-134. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. (a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Dog Control Officer or by a law enforcement officer if the: (1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond required by this article; (2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by this article; (3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or (4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. (b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: (1)  Not validly registered as required by this article; (2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or (3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. (c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of the costs to the city and/or county for confiscating and boarding the dog. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within four days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The costs for confiscating, boarding, and disposal of said dog shall remain the responsibility of the owner of the dog. 
Sec. 14-135. - Limits of city liability.     It is the intent of this article that the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Under no circumstances shall the city or any of its employees or officials which enforce or fail to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog that a dog control officer has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this article, or by a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this article. 
Sec. 14-136. - Violations of this article. (a)  The owner of a dangerous dog who violates this article or whose dog is subject to confiscation under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this article, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. (b)  The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates this article or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this article, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. (c)  In addition to the penalties for violations as herein above set out, the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the dog control officer, and thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. (d)  No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while both the dog and victim are on the dog owner's property. 
Secs. 14-137—14-149. - Reserved 
DIVISION 8. - INTERPRETATION, APPLICATION, VIOLATIONS, VALIDITY, CONFLICT, AND ADOPTION DATE 
Sec. 14-150. - Purpose.     The public health, safety, good order, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Ashburn require the control of animals within the city. This ordinance provides for that control and provides the procedure for accomplishing that control. 
Sec. 14-151. - Jurisdiction.     The provisions in this article shall be applicable in the incorporated areas of the City of Ashburn. 
Sec. 14-152. - Administration and interpretations.     The authority and responsibility for administration of these regulations shall rest with the mayor. In exercising that authority and discharging that responsibility, the mayor may designate public officers of the city to be charged with enforcing this article. The city shall coordinate and cooperate with the Turner County Health Department and such other agencies as the City Council of the City of Ashburn deems advisable. 
Sec. 14-153. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager or the city manager's designee to enforce these regulations. (b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable as provided by in state law with each day such violations continue constituting a separate offense. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of these regulations; to recover damages; to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
Sec. 14-154. - Conflict and separability. (a)  If these regulations are found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. (b)  The provisions of this article are severable. If a section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases shall maintain full force and effect. 
Sec. 14-155. - Amendments.     When necessary to further its purposes, this article may be amended by the City Council of the City of Ashburn. 
Sec. 14-156. - Conflicting provisions repealed.     All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 14-157. - Adoption date.     The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Ashburn and are hereby ordered to be given immediate effect from and after the date of its passage. 
Secs. 14-158—14-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50. State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-9-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 14-171. - Vaccination required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any canine or feline which has not been vaccinated against rabies as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. Evidence of such vaccination shall consist of a certificate bearing the owner's name and address, number of vaccination tag issued, date of vaccination, date the animal shall be revaccinated, type and lot number of the vaccine administered, and the signature of the person administering the vaccine. The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original given to the owner, the first copy filed in the office of the county board of health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine. All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state or by another person qualified under state law for that purpose. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.31, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-86. 
Sec. 14-172. - Proof of vaccination.     Animals required to be vaccinated under section 14-171 shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year in a clearly visible location. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.32, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-87. 
Sec. 14-173. - Display of vaccination certificate upon demand.     No person keeping or harboring an animal shall fail or refuse to exhibit a certificate of vaccination required by this chapter upon demand of the animal control officer, health department representative, sheriff, or any other city or county official. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.33, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-88. 
Sec. 14-174. - Report of animal bite required. (a)  It shall be the duty of every person bitten by an animal to report immediately to the county health department, giving his full name, age, and address; the circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite; the medical treatment given; and the name and address of the owner or custodian of the animal. (b)  It shall be the duty of every person owning or having custody of an animal which has bitten a human being to report the same to the county health department and confine the animal in a secure enclosure for observation and examination by the animal control officer and/or representatives of the county health department. No person having the custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse, or neglect to immediately notify the city, or shall fail, refuse, or neglect to allow the animal control officer and/or a representative from the county health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal for the purpose of determining whether such animal has rabies. (c)  It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the county health department the full name, age, and address of any person under his care or observation who has been bitten by an animal in the city. If no physician is in attendance and the person is a child, it shall be the duty of the parent or guardian to make such report immediately. If the person is an adult, such person shall make the report. If such person is incapacitated, the report shall be made by whoever is caring for the person bitten. (Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 4.50—4.52, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-89. 
Sec. 14-175. - Report of animal biting animal required.     It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of any animal that bites another animal to report immediately to the county health department the existence and description of such animal; the owner's name, if known; the place where the biting incident occurred; a description of the bitten animal; and the name of its owner, if known. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.57, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-90. 
Sec. 14-176. - Reporting animals suspected of having rabies.     It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the county health department and the city the existence and description of such animal; the place where seen; the owner's name, if known; and the symptoms suggesting rabies. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.53, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-91. 
Sec. 14-177. - Reporting of suspected rabies cases by owners.     Whenever the owner or person having custody or possession of any animal shall observe or learn that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies or has acted in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it might have rabies, such owner or person shall immediately notify the city and shall allow the animal control officer and/or a representative of the county health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal until it shall be established that such animal does or does not have rabies. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.54, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-92. 
Sec. 14-178. - Disposition of carcass of suspected rabies cases.     It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of any animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of the animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be requested, to the animal control officer after the death of the animal. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.55, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-93. 
Sec. 14-179. - Veterinarian to quarantine suspected rabies cases.     All veterinarians treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies shall hold such animal in quarantine until the disposition of the animal by the animal control officer. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.56, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-94. 
Sec. 14-180. - Management of animals that scratch or bite humans. (a)  Dogs and cats. A healthy dog or cat that bites or scratches a person or another animal should be confined and observed for ten days. This required quarantine applies to dogs and cats only. Rabies vaccine should not be administered during the observation period. While in confinement, any signs of illness should be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. The place of confinement shall be at the veterinarian clinic or agency designated by the city as the animal shelter at the expense of the owner or person having custody of possession of the animal, the veterinarian chosen by the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal at the owner's expense, or any other confinement location so designated and approved by the city. If symptoms suggestive of rabies are observed, the animal should be humanely killed, and a specimen should be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the specimen should be submitted immediately for rabies testing. (b)  Stray domestic animals and other species. Any stray or unwanted animal that bites or scratches a person or domestic animal may be humanely euthanized and a specimen submitted for testing. Animals other than dogs or cats that bite or scratch a person and are suspected of being rabid should immediately be reported to the county health department. Management of animals other than dogs and cats is dependent on the animal species, the circumstances of the bite, and the epidemiology of rabies in the area and shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative. (c)  Livestock. Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, swine, and sheep are not likely to be carriers of rabies. Treatment will be weighed against the circumstances of exposure by the animal control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative. If at the time of exposure the animal is clinically ill with signs suggestive of rabies, the animal control officer or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative from the county health department, will immediately and humanely kill the animal and a specimen will be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. The cost of testing will be the responsibility of the animal owner, if known. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.58, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-95. 
Sec. 14-181. - Management of animals exposed to rabies. (a)  Generally. Any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal (particularly bobcat, raccoon, fox, skunk, or coyote) which is not available for testing should be considered exposed to rabies. (b)  Unvaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner of the animal is unwilling to have this done (upon approval of the department head of the county health department and the city) the exposed animal must be placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The responsibility for isolation of an exposed unvaccinated animal remains with the owner. The animal must be kept in a pen that has been built to the specifications of the state rabies control manual, appendix C, and approved by the department head of the county health department and the city. Additionally, a second fence 18 to 24 inches in distance from the inner pen must be erected around the perimeter to guarantee complete isolation of the quarantined animal from other animals and human contact. The total construction cost of this confinement area is the sole responsibility of the pet owner. Previously vaccinated dogs and cats whose rabies vaccination has lapsed for more than 30 days are considered unvaccinated and will be treated as such. (c)  Vaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated (vaccinated at least one month prior to exposure) should be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. (d)  Livestock exposed to rabies. Vaccinated livestock (vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a USDA approved vaccine for that species at least 30 days prior to the attack) bitten by a rabid animal should be revaccinated immediately, confined, and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. (e)  Other animals exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated animals bitten by a rabid animal should be euthanized immediately. If an animal has been vaccinated with a USDA approved vaccine for that species, the animal must be revaccinated immediately and placed in confinement for a minimum of 90 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.59, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-96. 
Sec. 14-182. - Quarantine of area of city.     Whenever in the judgment of the city council, after consultation with the county health department, the public health and safety so require, the council shall declare and establish a quarantine zone or area consisting of the whole or any part of the city and maintain such quarantine therein until such time as they may deem it advisable to lift the same. During the existence of such quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations prescribed by the city council with reference to such quarantine. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.60, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-97. 
Sec. 14-183. - Retention of animals suspected of having rabies. (a)  If the animal control officer or poundkeeper operating a pound for the city suspects that any animal impounded has rabies, he shall notify the county animal control department. A qualified veterinarian shall examine such animal and if the veterinarian believes such animal should be held for future observation, the veterinarian shall so inform the animal control officer. (b)  If an animal is found to be afflicted with rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating the pound for the city shall confine the animal as directed. (c)  If an animal does not have rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating a pound for the city shall release it or dispose of it in the manner prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.61, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-98. 
Sec. 14-184. - Animal exposed to rabies barred from city.     No person shall bring any animal into the city in which rabies has been present within six months prior thereto. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.62, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-99. 
Secs. 14-185—14-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONMENT, CRUELTY, AND NEGLECT[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Local authority to adopt ordinances for animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18. 
Sec. 14-201. - Abandonment of animals.     No person shall release an animal on any public or private property with the intention of abandoning the animal. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.18, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-116. 
Sec. 14-202. - Cruelty and neglect to animals prohibited. (a)  No animal in the incorporated areas of the city shall be subject to cruelty and/or neglect as outlined in this section. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform a cruel act on any animal; nor shall any person harm, maim, or kill any domestic animal, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: (1)  Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or (2)  Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry. (c)  The method used for killing the animal in the situations outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in subsection (b) of this section shall incur no liability for such death. (d)  This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer or animal control officer. (e)  It shall be the duty of the animal owner, caretaker, or possessor to provide adequate shelter, food, water, and sanitary conditions at all times; and to provide necessary medicare care including, but not limited to, the required annual rabies inoculation. Failure to comply with this section constitutes neglect and is a violation of this chapter. (f)  When harnessed all animals shall be harnessed in such a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, and the animal shall be given plenty of room on a harness to exercise. (g)  Any violation of this section shall be enforced as outlined in article II of this chapter. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.70, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-117. 
Sec. 14-203. - Confiscation of suspected abused animals.     If an animal control officer and/or any law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is subject to abuse as defined in this chapter, he shall confiscate and impound the animal pending the conclusion of an investigation. The investigation shall be completed by the end of the seventh business day, at which time a finding shall be issued by the animal control officer. If a finding is made that the animal is being abused, cruelty to animal charges shall be filed against the owner and the animal will become the property of the city. If a determination is reached that the animal is not being abused, the animal will be returned to its owner, and follow-up investigations may be conducted by the animal control officer at the discretion of the animal control officer. The responsibility for costs related to the confiscation and impoundment during the investigation will rest with the owner, regardless of the determination reached. (Ord. No. 01-04, § 4.71, 4-5-2001) Editor's note— Formerly, § 14-118. 
Secs. 14-204—14-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CLASSIFICATION OF DOGS AS DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-04, § 2, adopted May 7, 2015, repealed art. VI in its entirety, and § 3(Exh. A) of said ordinance enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 14-231—14-238 pertained to dangerous dogs, and derived from Ord. No. 01-04, §§ 4.70—4.76, adopted April 5, 2001. 
Sec. 14-231. - Purpose, definitions, and exceptions. (a)  Purpose . This article is passed under the authority of and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. The purpose of this article is to clearly define local government responsibility, as well as limit the administrative and liability burdens upon the city with regard to dangerous or vicious dogs.     As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1, to the extent that the application of any provision hereof would result in the control and regulation of dogs in a manner less restrictive that the minimum standards provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8, then such provision contained herein shall yield and the applicable provision contained in O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8 shall govern. (b)  Definitions . Unless otherwise defined within this article, all terms contained herein shall have the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. As provided in that code section, the following definitions are incorporated herein: (1)  Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog. (2)  Dangerous dog means any dog that: a.  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; b.  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or c.  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. (3)  Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. (4)  Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack.     If the definition of any term contained above is modified or amended as set forth in O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8, then such term shall be deemed to have the meaning as provided by statute and the definitions above shall yield to such statutory definitions. (c)  Exceptions. (1)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog within the meaning of this article. (2)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog within the meaning of this article if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 5. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-232. - Designation of a dog control officer and designation of authority. (a)  The city's animal control officer shall be designated as the "dog control officer" for purposes of this article. It shall be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify as appropriate suspected dangerous or vicious dogs. In the event that the city does not have a designated animal control officer, then the "dog control officer" shall be appointed by the city council, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(b). (b)  The dog control officer's duty of investigation and classification arises only after a report is made to such dog control officer regarding events which occurred within the incorporated portions of the city which events may warrant classification of a dog as dangerous or vicious. Such a report may be made by any law enforcement agency, rabies control office, local or state board of health, or citizen. (c)  The dog control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless he or she is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. (d)  The city council may designate an animal control board or local board of health to receive appeals from dog owners regarding classification of dangerous or vicious dogs, as set forth herein below (hereinafter referred to as the "designated authority.") In the event that the city council does not designate such an authority to receive appeals, such appeals shall be handled by the county probate court as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-233. - Investigation and determination of classification, notice of classification, right of appeal, and hearings before a designated authority. (a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. (b)  Upon completion of his or her investigation, the dog control officer shall: (1)  Determine that the dog is not subject to classification; (2)  Determine that the dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog; or (3)  Determine that the dog is subject to classification as a vicious dog. (c)  In the event that the dog control officers determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall provide a notice of such classification to the dog's owner within 72 hours of such designation, which notice of classification shall include the following: (1)  A summary of the dog control officer's investigation, findings, and classification. (2)  A statement that the owner has a right to appeal the dog control officer's determination and classification to a hearing before the designated authority, as defined above. However, if an authority has not been established or designated for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to appeal the determination and request a hearing before the county probate court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. (3)  A notice of appeal form to be used by the dog owner for requesting an appeal of the dog's classification to a hearing before the designated authority or county probate court. (4)  A statement that the owner's request for appeal and hearing must be made within seven days of the date of the notice of classification. (5)  A statement that failure to make a request for appeal and hearing within such time period may result in waiver of the right to a hearing and, in the event of such a waiver, the dog control officer's determination and classification shall become effective for all purposes under this article.     Such notice of classification must be provided via certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. (d)  In the event that a dog owner appeals the dog control officer's determination and classification to a hearing before the designated authority or county probate court, then such determination and classification shall not become effective until issuance of the order on appeal, as set forth below. (e)  If an owner cannot be located within ten days of the dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog, then such dog may be released to an animal shelter as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, as determined by the dog control officer. (f)  All hearings on appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8. (g)  When a hearing on appeal is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this article, such hearing must be scheduled to be conducted within 30 days after the request is received. However, the hearing may be continued by the designated authority, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23(d). (h)  If the hearing on appeal is conducted by the designated authority, then at least ten days prior to the hearing, the designated authority shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the designated authority conducting the hearing shall receive evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination and classification. (i)  If the hearing on appeal is conducted by the designated authority, then within ten days after the hearing on appeal, the designated authority shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination and conclusions (herein referred to as the "order on appeal"). If the order on appeal upholds the dog control officer's classification of the dog as dangerous or vicious, then such order must specify the date upon which the classification shall become effective. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-234. - Certificates of registration, dog owner responsibilities, and other restrictions. (a)  The owner of any classified dog must obtain a certificate of registration issued and renewed annually pursuant to this article and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. Such certificate of registration must be initially obtained within ten days from the effective date of classification. (b)  An owner must apply to renew an existing certificate of registration annually, within ten days of the expiration of one year from the previous renewal date or initial issuance date. (c)  An owner applying for an initial certificate of registration or renewing an existing certificate of registration shall pay an annual registration fee of $100.00. (d)  At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, the dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with the requirements set out in this article. (e)  Failure to obtain and thereafter annually apply for renewal of a certificate of registration constitutes a violation of this article. (f)  A certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for a dangerous dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements are met by the owner: (1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and (2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. (g)  A certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for a vicious dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements are met by the owner: (1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; (2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; (3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and (4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. (h)  Certificates of registration shall be non-transferable. (i)  Notwithstanding any provision contained above, a certificate of registration shall not be issued or renewed in the following circumstances: (1)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age. (2)  Only one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. (3)  Only one certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued per owner. (4)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of O.C.G.A. Title 4, Chapter 8, of this article, or of any local ordinance implementing the restrictions contained therein. (5)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: a.  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; b.  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or c.  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. (j)  An owner of a classified dog must notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a person, or has died. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. Provided, however, a vicious dog may not be transferred, sold, or donated. (k)  An owner of a classified dog shall keep the dog in a proper enclosure unless restrained by a strong leash and accompanied by a responsible person. Vicious dogs must also be muzzled when outside the enclosure. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with the dog's vision or respiration but will prevent the dog from biting any person. (l)  An owner of a dog classified as dangerous or vicious in another jurisdiction within this state, which owner is moving into the city, must notify the dog control officer of within ten days of residency within the city. (m)  An owner of a dog meeting the classification requirements hereunder, or meeting similar classification requirements in a previous state of residence, which owner is moving into the city from outside of the State of Georgia, must notify the dog control officer within 30 days of residency within the city. (n)  The dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. (o)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-235. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. (a)  A classified dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer if the owner of such classified dog fails to comply with any provision set forth in this article. (b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated may recover such dog upon proof of compliance with the provisions of this article and payment of all fines, charges for services performed by the dog control officer, and reasonable confiscation and housing costs. However, such payments shall not be a prerequisite to recovery of the dog if the confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer, a designated authority, or the probate court. Criminal prosecution for a violation of this article shall not be stayed due to owner recovery of the dog. (c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the requirements and responsibilities set forth herein within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2. (d)  Refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall constitute a violation of this article. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-236. - Immediate impoundment. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, a law enforcement officer or the dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the dog poses a threat to the public safety. (b)  The owner of any dog that has been impounded may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs. However, such payments shall not be a prerequisite to recovery of the dog if the impoundment is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-237. - Euthanasia.     Euthanasia shall only be utilized as authorized by O.C.G.A. Chapter 8 of Title 4. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-238. - Prior classification determinations.     Any dog previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog shall on and after the adoption of this ordinance [from which this article derives] be classified as a dangerous dog under this article. Any dog previously classified as a dangerous dog shall on and after the adoption of this ordinance [from which this article derives] be classified as a vicious dog under this article. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-239. - Sovereign immunity.     It is the intent of this article that the owner of a classified dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such dog. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-31, Under no circumstances shall a local government or any employee or official of a local government be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. Under no circumstances shall the city or any of its employees or officials which enforce or fail to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers any injury or damages inflicted or caused by any dog, including but not limited to any classified dog, any dog that has been reported to the dog control officer for investigation and classification, any dog that a dog control officer has determined is not a classified dog, any dog that the dog control officer has failed to determine is or is not a classified dog, any classified dog that was not kept or restrained in the manner described in this article, or any classified dog whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage as required in this article. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Sec. 14-240. - Violations of this article.     An owner of a classified dog who fails to comply with any provision set forth in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Additionally, such acts may constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-32. (Ord. No. 15-04, § 3(Exh. A), 5-7-2015) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 50; historical preservation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. State Law reference— Access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq.; water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 
Sec. 18-31. - Codes adopted by reference.     The following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, the latest editions as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be enforced by the city: International Building Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Mechanical Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Fuel Gas Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Plumbing Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments National Electrical Code 2008 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Energy Conservation Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Residential Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments International Fire Code 2006 Edition with Georgia Amendments  (Ord. No. 09-09, § 1, 11-5-2009) Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 09-09, adopted Nov. 11, 2009, repealed former § 18-31 and enacted a new § 18-31 as set out herein. The former § 18-31 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1983. 
Sec. 18-32. - Self-inspection exemption.     The city council, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws, page 1632, does exempt the city from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). (Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-11-1996) 
Sec. 18-33. - Provisions saved from repeal.     Ordinance number 97-02, adopted May 1, 1997, relating to building permit fees, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 18-34—18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY NUMBERING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 18-61. - Purposes.     The purposes of this article are to ensure that all buildings and houses in the city have properly displayed the house or building number designated for that particular house or building. The city council recognizes that the proper display of such designated numbers is of benefit to the citizens of the city to, among other things, provide for accurate information in regard to providing city services and for emergency situations. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-62. - House and building numbering.     After a house or building has been assigned its respective number or numbers, or after a house or building has been designated a new number or numbers, the owner, occupant or agent of any such house or building shall place or cause to be placed upon each house or building controlled by him the number or numbers assigned to such house or building under the system established by the city or its designee; and all incorrect numbers and numbers which do not conform with the provisions of this article shall simultaneously be removed. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-63. - Effective date of numbers.     All numbers assigned to houses and buildings shall be placed on such houses and buildings within 20 days after such numbers are assigned. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-64. - Cost of numbers responsibility of property owners; height, material of numbers.     The cost of numbers shall be borne by the property owner. The number shall be not less than three inches in height and shall be made of a durable and clearly visible material. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-65. - Location of numbers.     The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building or house so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. Whenever any building or house is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, such number shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building or house, or upon a gatepost, fencepost or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-66. - Administration.     Upon application by any person to which this article applies requesting the correct property number of such person's property, the city or its designee shall provide that person with the correct number. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 18-67. - New buildings; numbers required, prerequisite to issuance of building permit and final approval of structure.     Whenever any house or building shall be erected or located in the city, the owner shall procure the correct number or numbers as designated by the city or its designee for the property and shall immediately fasten the number or numbers so assigned upon such house or building as provided by this article. A building permit shall not be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has procured from the city or its designee the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired or altered or modified shall be withheld by the building inspector for the city until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to such structure. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Sec. 18-68. - Penalties.     The city may but is not required to notify any persons subject to this article of noncompliance; and if such noncompliance is not rectified, such person shall be subject to prosecution. (Ord. No. 94-02, § I, 5-5-1994) 
Secs. 18-69—18-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86. State Law reference— Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 
Sec. 18-101. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial means any type of building other than residential.     Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet or urinal in an existing building.     Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 1, 3-7-1991) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-102. - Residential requirements.     On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs a: (1)  Gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; (2)  Shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; (3)  Urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; (4)  Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or (5)  Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 2, 3-7-1991) 
Sec. 18-103. - Commercial requirements.     On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any type which does not meet the requirements of section 18-102. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 3, 3-7-1991) 
Sec. 18-104. - Effective date of requirements.     The requirements of section 18-102 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building, including replacement of toilets or showers or both. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 4, 3-7-1991) 
Sec. 18-105. - Exemptions. (a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-102, 18-103 and 18-104 when: (1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewer system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing buildings; (2)  When such plumbing or sewer system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this article were installed; (3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or (4)  Units to be installed are: a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or c.  Toilets for juveniles. (b)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee as determined from time to time by the city council shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 5, 3-7-1991) 
Sec. 18-106. - Enforcement; penalty. (a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector. (b)  Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-12. (Ord. No. 91-002, § 6, 3-7-1991) 