Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; rabies control, § 14-86 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 86. State Law reference— Authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 50-1. - [Rules and regulations adopted.] (a)  Rules and regulations pertaining to food service as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-14 entitled "Food Service." (b)  Rules and regulations pertaining to tourist accommodations as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-18 entitled "Tourist Accommodations." (c)  Rules and regulations for land disposal of domestic septage as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-25 entitled "Land Disposal of Domestic Septage." (e)  Rules and regulations for on-site sewage management systems as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-26 entitled "On-Site Sewage Management Systems." (f)  Rules and regulations pertaining to drinking water supply as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-55 entitled "Drinking Water Supply." (g)  Rules and regulations pertaining to public swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks as adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources consisting of Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 290-5-57 entitled "Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks." (Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 3-4-2010) Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted March 4, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 50-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— The initial wellhead protection survey conducted to determine existing conditions within the 1500-foot zone of the Pate Street water well, the Manhatten water well, the City Barn water well and the North Ashburn water well is on file in the office of the city clerk. State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 
Sec. 50-31. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 1(a), 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 50-32. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infection characteristics, may: (1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.     Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes are disposed of on land by placing earth cover on the site.     Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 2, 1-7-1993) Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-33. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone.     There is established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 1,500 feet. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 3, 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 50-34. - Permitted uses.     The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: (1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and (2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 4, 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 50-35. - Prohibited uses.     The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not any such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 50-34: (1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of pesticides; (2)  Septic tanks or appurtenant drain fields; (3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 50-34; (4)  Sanitary landfills; (5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; (6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; (7)  Underground storage tanks; and (8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 5, 1-7-1993) 
Sec. 50-36. - Administration.     The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the zoning ordinance for the city, as presently enacted or may from time to time be amended, appendix A to this volume. (Ord. No. 93-001, § 6, 1-7-1993) Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Chapter 54 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-08, §§ I—VII, adopted June 7, 2007, amended Ch. 54, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 54 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38. State Law reference— Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; fire safety requirements for historic buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1; Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24; historic landmark or district designation procedure, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26; certificates of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28; certification as rehabilitated historic property for purposes of preferential assessment, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.2; landmark historic property for purposes of ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.3; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; state grants to municipalities for repair of certain facilities having historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 54-1. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among their most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people;     In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business;     In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and     In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same;     The mayor and council of the city hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and uses of places, districts, sites, buildings, cemeteries, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest of value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. (Ord. No. 07-08, § I, 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district.     Contributing resource means a building, site, structure, or object within a historic district that adds to the historic significance of that district.     Demolition by neglect means allowing a building to fall into such a state of disrepair that it becomes necessary or desirable to demolish it. Property owners have been accused of permitting demolition by neglect on purpose, in order to save rehabilitation costs.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing.     Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property.     Historic district means a geographically definable area possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development and designated as historic by the mayor and council of the city pursuant to the criteria in article III of this chapter.     Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object, and the land on which the historic property and any related buildings and/or structures are located, and designated as historic by the mayor and city council pursuant to the criteria in section 54-62 of this chapter. The land surrounding the historic property to be designated as historic includes that which provides the grounds, premises or setting for the historic property.     Historic resource report means a document created by or for the historic preservation commission containing the following information about a historic district and/or historic property: (1)  A physical description; (2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, and/or aesthetic significance; (3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing or non-contributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; (4)  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and (5)  Representative photographs.     Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, and may include any one or more of the following: (1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; (2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; (3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; (4)  A change in the location, size, or type of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or (5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavement, or other appurtenant features.     Noncontributing resource means a building, site, structure, or object within a historic district that does not add to the historic significance of that district.     Ordinary repair or maintenance means work for which an approved certificate of appropriateness application is not required, and the purpose and effect of such work is to correct the deterioration of, decay of, or damage to, the real property or structure, and to restore same, as nearly as practicable, to the condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or damage. (Ord. No. 07-08, § II, 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sec. 54-31. - Creation of the historic preservation commission.     There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Ashburn Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "HPC"). (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(A), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-32. - HPC position within the city.     This HPC shall be part of the planning functions of the city. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(B), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-33. - HPC members: number, appointment, terms, and compensation.     The HPC shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. At least two members must be property owners or business owners within the Ashburn Local Historic District. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. All successors to the initial members shall serve three-year terms. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(C), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-34. - Statement of the HPC's powers.     The HPC shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as a historic property; (2)  Recommend to the mayor and city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by this chapter as historic properties or historic districts; (3)  Review applications for certificate of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; (4)  Recommend to the mayor and city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be rescinded; (5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; (6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976" (O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 through 5); (7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within Ashburn and on general historic preservation activities; (8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts and the mayor and city council, or the HPC itself may from time to time, deem it necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (9)  Seek out local, state, federal, and private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired to the mayor and city council; (10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic resources or historic districts designated; (11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; (12)  Receive donations, grants, or funds with the consent of the mayor and city council; (13)  Partner with the development authority and/or the downtown development authority to receive gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties; (14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; (15)  Participate in regional, state, federal, and private historic preservation programs, and with the consent of the mayor and city council, enter into agreements to do the same; and (16)  Issue cease and desist orders in the event work within a historic district or on a historic property is not performed in accordance with the respective certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(D), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-35. - HPC administration.     The city council shall, by resolution, appoint an administrator of the HPC. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(E), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-36. - HPC's power to adopt rules and standards.     The HPC shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business, and for consideration of applications for property designations and certificate of appropriateness, such as by-laws, and design guidelines. The HPC shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The HPC shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The HPC shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(F), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-37. - Conflict of interest.     No member shall cast a vote on any issue before the preservation commission which involves the interests of that individual or an organization in which that member has an ownership interest or position of control, or directly represents, or vote on any matter which could provide direct financial benefit to that member. Whenever a conflict of interest situation arises in the conduct of business the following actions shall be taken: (1)  The individual member shall divulge the existence and reasons for the potential conflict and abstain from voting. (2)  The affected member, may, however, participate in any presentation or discussion or respond to questions pertaining to the issue at hand. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(G), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-38. - Records of HPC meetings.     A public record shall be kept of the HPC's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. (Ord. No. 07-08, § III(H), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 54-39—54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECOMMENDATIONS AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 
Sec. 54-61. - Preliminary research by HPC. (a)  The HPC shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within Ashburn. (b)  The HPC shall present to the mayor and city council recommendations for the designation of any historic district or historic property. (Ord. No. 07-08, § IV(A), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-62. - Designation process.     When a building, structure, site, or object appears to meet the criteria outlined in subsection (3) of this section, the following procedures must be undertaken in order to designate a historic property and/or historic district: (1)  Application for designation. Designations may be proposed by the HPC, the mayor and city council, a historical society, a neighborhood association, a group of property owners for the designation of a district as historic, or a property owner for the designation of his or her property as historic. (2)  Recommendation by HPC. The designation of a historic district or historic property may only be considered by the mayor and city council upon the recommendation of the HPC. Upon receipt of the HPC's recommendation and a copy of the historic resource report and analysis of the proposed historic district or historic property under the criteria established in subsection (3) herein, the HPC and the mayor and city council shall schedule a public hearing to consider the proposed designation. The city clerk's office shall provide notice of a public hearing in the same manner as set forth in subsection (3) herein. (3)  Public hearing requirement. The HPC and the mayor and city council will hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property within the city. Per the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. 44-10-26, notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues of the principle newspaper in local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the city clerk's office to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten and no more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the Turner County Tax Roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. (4)  Mayor and city council action on HPC recommendations. Following the public hearing, the mayor and city council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation. If approved or approved with modifications the mayor and city council may adopt a designation ordinance for the proposed historic district or historic property. (5)  Required components of a designation ordinance. An ordinance designating a historic district or historic property shall: a.  Describe the boundaries of a proposed historic district; b.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property, including the map and parcel number and address of each property; c.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; d.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the HPC prior to any material change in appearance of a designated property; and e.  Require that the property or district boundaries be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (6)  Modification or withdrawal of proposed designations. Any recommendation to modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the HPC within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the mayor and city council. (7)  Notification to historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property of district as historic, the historic preservation commission must submit the historic resource report to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. (8)  Notification of adoption of designation ordinance. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the mayor and city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or object in a historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city clerk's office, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the Turner County Tax Roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. (9)  Notification of other agencies regarding this designation. The HPC shall notify all necessary agencies within the city and Turner County of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization(s). (10)  Effect of designation. After designation by the mayor and city council, a historic district or historic property shall be subject to the procedures and regulations contained in this chapter. Unless otherwise specified, the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, as amended from time to time, shall apply as the design guidelines for the historic district or historic property. These procedures, regulations, and design guidelines shall be in addition to the provisions of other articles of this chapter, and other regulations of the city that shall remain in full force and effect. (11)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while designation ordinance is pending. If a designation ordinance is being considered, the mayor and city council shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. (12)  Local historic district established. The boundaries shown on attachment A are hereby designated as the Ashburn Local Historic District. A plat showing the boundaries of such historic district is on file in the office of the city clerk and is incorporated in this article by reference as fully as if set forth verbatim. (Ord. No. 07-08, § IV(B), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-63. - Designation criteria for a historic property or historic district.     In evaluating a building, site, structure, object, or district for historic designation, the following criteria shall apply to each building, site, structure, object, or district: (1)  Was constructed or achieved its significance during the period of historic significance as delineated in the National Register of Historic Places guidelines or as established in the nomination pursuant to those guidelines; (2)  Has a quality of significance in American, state, or local history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture, which is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association: a.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history (otherwise known as criterion "A" of the National Register Criteria); b.  Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past (otherwise known as criterion "B" of the National Register Criteria); c.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction (otherwise known as criterion "C" of the National Register Criteria); d.  Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history (otherwise known as criterion "D" of the National Register Criteria). (3)  Properties within historic districts shall be evaluated and classified as contributing or noncontributing resources. (Ord. No. 07-08, § IV(C), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 54-64—54-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BY THE HPC 
Sec. 54-81. - Material changes to historic properties or to properties within historic districts. (a)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a building, structure, site, or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to, and approved by, the HPC. (b)  Under no circumstances shall any permit for alteration, demolition, or construction be issued by other city or county departments until a certificate of appropriateness application has been approved for such work. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(A), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-82. - Application requirements.     All applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made as required by the HPC and shall at a minimum contain the following information: (1)  Elevation drawings and material samples. Every application or review involving the construction of a new building or structure and alterations and/or additions to existing structures in any historic district or to a historic property shall be accompanied by exterior elevation drawings drawn to a specific scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional and submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the HPC. Said exterior elevation drawings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed change(s) to buildings or structures and new construction, as applicable. Each application shall also indicate proposed materials. (2)  Photographs. Photographs of all sides of the affected existing building(s) or structure(s) visible from the street shall accompany all applications, as well as photographs of adjoining properties. Photographs of all sides of the building visible from the street shall accompany applications for the demolition of structures under consideration for demolition, as well as photographs showing contiguous properties. (3)  Site plan and landscaping plan. For every application, a plot plan or site plan drawn to a specified scale shall be submitted which shows all improvements affecting appearances visible from the street, such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, tree protection areas, accessory buildings, signs, lights and other elements. In the case of a building or structure demolition, the site plan and landscaping plan shall show how the foundation area will be restored. (4)  Additional information. Any additional information as may reasonably be required by the HPC shall be submitted with the application.     Where, in the opinion of the HPC, a requested change would be considered minor, the HPC may vary or waive any of the information requirements of this section for applications for a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(B), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-83. - Review criteria.     When considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects, including the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, and the city design guidelines for the local historic district, attached hereto as attachment B shall be used as guidelines. In addition, the HPC shall consider: (1)  The effect of the proposed work on the property upon which such work is to be done; (2)  The relationship between such work and other buildings, structures, or objects on the landmark site or other property in the historic district. In evaluating the effect and the relationship, the HPC shall consider historical and architectural significance, architectural style, design arrangement, texture, and materials; (3)  The HPC shall not have review authority over alterations to the interiors of a building or structure, but it shall study such plans as they relate to the exterior. The HPC shall not have review authority over paint colors used on the exterior of designated buildings; (4)  A rehabilitation should relate properly to the original components of a building and the surrounding neighborhood. It is important to maintain existing old-growth trees in a rehabilitation within a historic district or historic property; (5)  Design standards for new construction and additions focus attention on those special visual and spatial qualities that a historic district and historic property is established to protect. Since architectural styles and details vary within a district, the standards emphasize the relationship among buildings in the immediate setting. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(C), 6-7-2007) Editor's note— Attachment B is not set out herein, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 54-84. - Additional criteria for new construction.     When the applicant wishes to undertake new construction within a historic district or on the site of a historic property, the HPC shall consider the compatibility of the new construction with the existing character of the historic district or the historic property. However, the HPC shall not dictate the architectural style of the new construction. Compatible design shall mean architectural design and construction that will fit harmoniously into the historic district or on the historic property's site. The HPC shall include the following points in its consideration of a certificate of appropriateness application for new construction: (1)  Scale: height and width; (2)  Massing and building form; (3)  Setbacks; (4)  Orientation and site coverage; (5)  Alignment, rhythm, and spacing; (6)  Maintaining materials within the historic district or on the historic property's site; (7)  Trim and detail; the link between old and new; (8)  Facade proportions and window patterns; (9)  Entrances and porch projections; (10)  Roof forms; and (11)  Maintaining quality within the historic district or on the historic property's site. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(D), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-85. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property or property within a historic district. (a)  The HPC shall have the authority to deny a certificate of appropriateness application for demolition or relocation. (b)  A public hearing shall be scheduled for each certificate of appropriateness application for demolition or relocation. The applicant shall prove through substantial, competent evidence, that the demolition or relocation is necessary, including in the evidence presented: (1)  Alternatives to demolition or relocation such as planned development districts; (2)  Whether the building or structure can be retained on the site; (3)  Whether relocating the building or structure is appropriate and feasible; (4)  Whether the applicant has the ability to build proposed new construction within a reasonable period of time if the application is approved; and (5)  Whether the demolition is justified as an undue hardship. (c)  The HPC shall not grant certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans and/or intentions for the site. (d)  Additional criteria on certificate of appropriateness applications for relocation. When the applicant wishes to relocate a building or structure designated a historic property, or relocate a building or structure into or outside of a historic district, the HPC shall consider: (1)  The contribution the building or structure makes to its present setting; (2)  Whether there are definite plans for the site to be vacated; (3)  Whether the building or structure can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and (4)  The compatibility of the building or structure to its proposed site and adjacent properties.     These considerations shall be in addition to the points contained in subsection (b) of this subsection. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(E), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-86. - Entities exempt from application requirements.     The department of transportation and any contractors, including the City of Ashburn and Turner County, performing work funded by the department of transportation are not required to obtain certificate of appropriateness. The City of Ashburn and Turner County are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificate of appropriateness; provided, however, that the City of Ashburn and Turner County shall notify the HPC at least 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the HPC an opportunity to comment. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(F), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-87. - Submission of plans for HPC.     An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans, or other documentation as outlined on the certificate of appropriateness application, which may change from time to time. Additional information pertaining to the certificate of appropriateness application may be requested by staff or the HPC. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans and/or intentions for the site. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(G), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-88. - Denial.     Denial of an application by the HPC shall preclude consideration of a substantially similar request for a period of 12 months from the date of the meeting at which the denial was given. This period of preclusion does not apply if a substantially different request is submitted which addresses the grounds for denial. The HPC shall determine if a request is "substantially different" and addresses the grounds for denial, allowing for reconsideration within the 12-month period. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(H), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-89. - HPC decision on application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  The HPC shall approve the application if it finds that the proposed material change(s) would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property of the historic district. (b)  The HPC shall approve with conditions the application upon finding that the proposed material change(s) would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property of the historic district if the applicant fulfills certain condition(s) mandated by the HPC. (c)  The HPC shall deny the application if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(I), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-90. - Public hearings on applications for certificate of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard.     At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the HPC shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the HPC deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application; provided that, as required by subsection 54-85(b), in all applications involving the demolition of a structure, a public hearing shall be held. In the event a public hearing is required pursuant to subsection 54-85(b) or in the event the HPC elects to hold a public hearing as provided in this section, notice of said public hearing shall be provided in accordance with the following.     At least a ten-day notice of the time and place of each public hearing shall be given by the HPC as follows: (a)  In writing to the applicant and the abutting property owners; (b)  By publication at least once in the form of an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; and (c)  By sign posted on the property. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(J), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-91. - Approach taken by the HPC in reviewing a certificate of appropriateness application.     In making a decision on an application, the HPC shall be aware of the importance of finding a way to meet the current needs of the applicant. The HPC shall also recognize the importance of approving plans that will be reasonable for the applicant to implement that decision. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(K), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-92. - Technical advice.     The HPC shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(L), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-93. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  The HPC shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building, structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the HPC. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the HPC. (b)  Failure of the HPC to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(M), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-94. - Necessary actions to be taken by HPC upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. (a)  In the event the HPC rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transfer a record of such actions and reasons, in writing to the applicant. The HPC may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. (b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the HPC shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(N), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-95. - Undue hardship.     Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the HPC, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the HPC may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as well, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. Undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(O), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-96. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness application. (a)  All work performed pursuant to an approved certificate of appropriateness application shall conform to the requirements of such application. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such application, the HPC shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. (b)  Upon completion of the work performed pursuant to an approved certificate of appropriateness application, HPC staff shall inspect such work to ensure compliance with the approved application. Staff shall issue a fully-executed certificate of appropriateness to the applicant after it finds the work completed is in compliance. (c)  The mayor and city council or HPC shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court or competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district. Except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(P), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-97. - Certificate of appropriateness application void if construction not commenced.     An approved certificate of appropriateness application shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of approval. certificate of appropriateness applications shall be approved for a period of 18 months and are renewable through administrative review. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(Q), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-98. - Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness.     The HPC shall keep a public record of all applications for certificate of appropriateness, and of all the HPC's proceedings in connection with said application. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(R), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-99. - Acquisition of property.     The HPC may, where such action is authorized by the mayor and city council, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. Such action shall be coordinated with the development authority and/or downtown development authority, when applicable. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(S), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-100. - Appeals.     Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the HPC relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city clerk's office within 15 days after the issuances of the determination pursuant to section 54-81 of this chapter. The mayor and city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the HPC, if the governing body finds that the HPC abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the mayor and city council may be taken to the Superior Court of Turner County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City of Ashburn and Turner County ordinance violations. (Ord. No. 07-08, § V(T), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 54-101—54-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS 
Sec. 54-121. - Ordinary repair or maintenance.     Ordinary repair or maintenance of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or damage; or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in appearance or a change in design, design materials or the outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. (Ord. No. 07-08, § VI(A), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-122. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair;     Property owners of historic property or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The HPC shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: (1)  The HPC shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors, and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a buildings structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair; (2)  In the event the HPC determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the HPC will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps that need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to initiate repairs; (3)  In the event that the condition is not acted upon within 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 54-141 of this chapter and, at the discretion of the mayor and city council, the HPC may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the HPC. (Ord. No. 07-08, § VI(B), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 54-123. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes and permits required. (a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. (b)  The approval of applications for certificate of appropriateness and the issuance of certificate of appropriateness shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining other permits and approvals required by the city. A building permit or other municipal permit shall be invalid if it is obtained without the presentation of the approved certificate of appropriateness application required for the proposed work. The HPC does not have any control over uses permitted within any designed historic property, and so the HPC does not approve proposed uses. The zoning administrator shall be the sole administrator of this Code as it pertains to the requirements for permitted or permissible uses. (Ord. No. 07-08, § VI(C), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 54-124—54-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTY PROVISIONS 
Sec. 54-141. - Generally.     Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as is provided for punishment of violations of the zoning ordinance of the city. Per section 12-4 of the Ashburn Zoning Ordinance, "Any person, firm, or corporation, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty upon conviction and shall be punished a maximum of $500.00. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense." (Ord. No. 07-08, § VII, 6-7-2007) 
Chapter 58 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 30; courts, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. State Law reference— Law enforcement officer appreciation day, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-6; peace officer memorial day and police week, O.C.G.A. § 1-4-7; Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; training requirements for police chiefs, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-20; special police, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of municipal law enforcement officers to be by fixed salary only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; definition of police officer for purpose of state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1; fleeing or attempting to elude police officers, impersonating law enforcement officer, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-395; public officer causing arrest or detention for violation involving public records, documents, and other items not civilly liable, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1(d); assault under color of office, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-3; tort liability for false arrest, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-1 et seq.; tort liability for false imprisonment, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-20; tort liability for malicious prosecution, O.C.G.A. § 51-7-40; authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sec. 58-31. - Police department—Composition; officer rank; arms and uniforms. (a)  Composition. The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the mayor and council shall prescribe. (b)  Rank. Following the police chief in rank may be captains, lieutenants, and the subordinate police officers, in order of seniority in each group. (c)  Arms and uniforms. Each officer and member of the police department shall be furnished with such uniform and police equipment as provided for by the city council. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed and shall be worn on duty at all times, unless otherwise ordered by a superior officer. The equipment and uniforms furnished by the city shall be and always remain the property of the city and shall be, when a change is ordered or on retirement from office, returned to the city. The members of the police department shall be liable on their bonds for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their arms and other equipment and uniforms. 
Sec. 58-32. - Same—Police chief. (a)  Appointment and powers. The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor and council. In the exercise of official duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the government of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. (b)  Bond and oath. Prior to entering upon the discharge of official duties, the police chief shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000.00 and is required to take an oath, which shall be taken and subscribed before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths. The following oath is required:     "I, ____________ , swear or affirm that I am not incumbent in any office of trust in this state, of the United States, or of any foreign state, and should I seek such office of trust, my separation from the City of Ashburn shall be instanter; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted public monies due this or any other state or political subdivision or authority thereto; that I am qualified to hold the office to which I am appointed for so long as I am employed with the City of Ashburn; that I will support or defend the Constitution of the United States of America and the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and I will faithfully perform and discharge the duties of my position, conscientiously and without malice or partiality, to the best of my ability; I further swear or affirm to obey, to adhere to, to uphold, and to enforce the laws of the United States of America and the State of Georgia at all times; and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Governor of the State of Georgia, (the Chief of Police of the City of Ashburn Police Department,) and the officers appointed over me, according to law; so help me God." (c)  Duties: The police chief shall have the following duties: (1)  To attend, personally or by designated police officer, all regular meetings of the city council, any special or called meetings upon request of the mayor or any council member, and all trials before the municipal court; (2)  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments, and rules of the city council; (3)  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court; (4)  To see that the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and all statutes applicable therein are faithfully enforced; (5)  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators thereof; (6)  To protect the rights of persons and property; (7)  To oversee the conduct of the officers and employees of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; (8)  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department including a log of all questions, activities, and investigations; (9)  To submit a monthly report to the city council outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by each police officer; (10)  To submit monthly to the Georgia Department of Public Safety the uniform crime report prescribed by law; and (11)  To discharge such other duties as may be required of such office by the executive officer or the city council. (d)  Resignation, removal, death, or disability: In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the police chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
Sec. 58-33. - Same—Police officers. (a)  Qualifications. Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall have the following qualifications: (1)  Be at least 18 years of age; (2)  Be a citizen of the United States; (3)  Have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; (4)  Not have been convicted, by any state or by the federal government, of any crime, the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in a federal or state prison or institution, nor shall such person have been convicted of sufficient misdemeanors to establish a pattern of disregard for the law; (5)  Be fingerprinted and a search made of local, state, and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record; (6)  Possess good moral character as determined by investigation under procedures established by the Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Council; (7)  Be found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from any physical, emotional, or mental condition which might adversely affect such person's exercising of the powers or duties of a police officer; (8)  Complete satisfactorily at least a basic course of 240 hours of instruction within 12 months of the date of appointment as a police officer, except that an extension may be granted by the Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Council on account of illness, injury, military service, or other reasons deemed sufficient by such council. (b)  Bond and oath. Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the Police Department shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall take and subscribe an oath. All officers shall take and subscribe the same oath required of the chief of police as set out in section 54-32, paragraph (b), hereinabove. (c)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. (d)  Conduct. Every member of the police department shall conduct such person's self in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  Absence from regular hours of duty without permission; (2)  Sleeping or loafing on duty; (3)  Insubordination or disobedience of orders; (4)  Engaging in any games of chance; (5)  Drinking any intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform; (6)  Wilful maltreatment of any prisoner or other person; (7)  Using violent, profane, or insolent language; (8)  Acting in a disorderly, immoral, or any other manner as to bring discredit upon the department; (9)  Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business, or operation of the police department without the consent of the city council; (10)  Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty; (11)  Accepting bribes of money, gifts, or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward, or gift of any kind from a person arrested or from any friend in such person's behalf while such person is in custody or after such person's release or discharge; (12)  Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of official duty. (e)  Penalties for improper conduct. Any police officer violating the rules or regulations of the police department or of this Code, upon conviction therefor by the city council, after due notice and hearing, or upon the plea of guilty, shall be reprimanded, fined, suspended, or dismissed by the city council. Any one or more of such penalties may be imposed in the discretion of the city council. (f)  Arrest authority. Police officers shall have the power to make arrests and in exercising such power shall observe all requirements imposed by the United States constitution and by all other provisions of law. (g)  Entering private dwellings. No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless such person is in pursuit of a fugitive whom the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. (h)  Use of police department vehicles. No City of Ashburn police car shall be operated outside the city limits of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, except in the case of an emergency, in hot pursuit, or on official business. (Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, 10-1-2009) 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Courts, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 58; planning, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Georgia Clean Communities Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 62-1. - Discharge of firearms. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge a firearm within the city. (b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: (1)  Persons who fire or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; or (2)  Law enforcement officers or members of the National Guard or armed forces of the United States, when such persons are engaged in the performance of their official duties. (Code 1983, § 13-1) State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq.; discharge of firearms on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 
Sec. 62-2. - Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, similar locations.     No person shall obstruct streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, public squares, or drains, gutters or ditches. (Code 1983, § 13-2) Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 62-3. - Spitting.     It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk of the city, whether such sidewalk is paved or not. (Code 1983, § 15-1) 
Sec. 62-4. - Billboard owners responsible for clean condition of sign and environs.     The owners of billboards within the city shall see that all loose papers, bills or other litter are promptly removed, thus removing all liability or chance of such loose papers, bills or litter from being blown on the sidewalks or streets. (Code 1983, § 13-7) 
Sec. 62-5. - Unauthorized use of fire hydrants.     No person shall open a city fire hydrant valve or draw water from such a fire hydrant without permission from the city. Firefighters and other city employees are exempt from this section provided they do so as part of their official duties as firefighters or employees. (Code 1983, § 8-1) Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 62-6. - Removing material from thoroughfares.     It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, scrape up or carry away sand, gravel, dirt, rock or earth from any public way of the city. (Code 1983, § 15-3) 
Sec. 62-7. - Excavations.     It shall be unlawful for any person to mechanically dig or excavate anywhere within the city without having first obtained a permit to do so issued by the mayor and council through the office of the city clerk. (Code 1983, § 13-5) 
Sec. 62-8. - Resisting and obstructing law enforcement. (a)  Findings. (1)  The city council in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city has established a police department. (2)  In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, it is necessary to provide police officers with the appropriate authority to carry out enforcement of the city Code and other state and federal statutes. (3)  It is necessary to prevent resisting arrest and hindering police officers in order to enforce the laws of the city and the state. (b)  Obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully obstruct or hinder any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties. (c)  Resistance. It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or invite resistance to lawful arrests or lawful orders from any police officer of the city. (d)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-12. (Res. No. 01-02, §§ 1—4, 1-4-2001) 
Sec. 62-9. - Provisions saved from repeal.     Ordinance number 93-005, adopted March 4, 1993, on the subject of disorderly conduct, is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 62-10—62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBSCENITY[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Obscene activity prohibited, § 10-41. State Law reference— Restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 62-41. - Distribution of obscene materials. (a)  A person commits the offense of distributing obscene materials when he sells, lends, rents, leases, gives, advertises, publishes, exhibits or otherwise disseminates to any person any obscene material of any description, knowing the obscene nature of the materials, or offers to do so, or possesses such material with the intent to do so. The term "knowing" shall be deemed to be either actual or constructive knowledge of the obscene contents of the subject matter; and a person has constructive knowledge of the obscene contents if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material; however, the character and reputation of the individual charged with an offense under this law and, if a commercial dissemination of obscene material is involved, the character and reputation of the business establishment involved may be placed in evidence by the defendant on the question of intent to violate this section. Undeveloped photographs, molds, printing plates and the like shall be deemed obscene notwithstanding that processing or other acts may be required to make the obscenity patent or to disseminate it. (b)  Material is obscene if: (1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion; (2)  The material taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value; and (3)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined in this subsection (b)(3): a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; b.  Acts of masturbation; c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. (c)  Any device designed or marketed as useful primarily for the simulation of human genital organs is obscene material under this section. (d)  Material not otherwise obscene may be obscene under this section if the distribution of the material, the offer to do so, or the possession with the intent to do so is a commercial exploitation of erotica solely for the sake of their prurient appeal. (e)  It is an affirmative defense under this section that dissemination of the material was restricted to: (1)  A person associated with an institution of higher learning, either as a member of the faculty or a matriculated student, teaching or pursuing a course of study related to such material; or (2)  A person whose receipt of such material was authorized in writing by a licensed medical practitioner or psychiatrist. (f)  Any materials declared to be obscene by this section and advertisements for such materials are declared to be contraband. (g)  The use of any premises in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. No. 86-12-002, 4-3-1986) 
Secs. 62-42—62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOITERING AND PROWLING[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 62-71. - Prohibited. (a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. (b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone and/or in consort with others, in a public place in such manner so as to: (1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians. (2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, regress in, on and to, such place or building. (d)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (c) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of the section. (Ord. No. 93-004, § I(13-9), 3-4-1993) 
Secs. 62-72—62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 
Section 62-101. - Excessive, unnecessary, and unusually loud noise.     It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the limits of the city. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: (1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. (2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (3)  Loud speakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is case upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. (4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. (5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. (6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. (7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. (8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such other manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. (9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers. (10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. (11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, or court street. (12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (13)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show, or sale. (14)  Metal rails, pillars, and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. (15)  Street railway cars, operation thereof. The causing, permitting, or continuing any excessive, unnecessary, and avoidable noise in the operation of a street railway car. (16)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. (17)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
Sec. 62-102. - Application for special permit.     Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the city council. Any permit granted by the city council hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The city council may grant the relief as applied for if they find: (1)  That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this article; or (2)  The activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other subsections of this section; and (3)  That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and (4)  The city council may prescribe any conditions or requirements they deem necessary to minimize the adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
Sec. 62-103. - Violation, a misdemeanor.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisoned in the city jail for up to 180 days, or shall be punished by both such fine and such imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided hereunder. 
Sec. 62-104. - Special regulations concerning fireworks. (a)  All state laws and regulations, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et al, shall be obeyed and shall be made a part hereof. (b)  In order to ignite, shoot off, or use consumer fireworks as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1(a)(1) in the City of Ashburn at any time other than those times specifically listed in the laws of the State of Georgia, the requesting person or party must apply for and obtain written permission from the Ashburn Chief of Police. The Ashburn Chief of Police may only grant permission to ignite, shoot off, or use consumer fireworks between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. except as stated in the laws of the State of Georgia. (Ord. No. 2017-02, § 1, 8-3-2017) 
Secs. 62-105—62-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CURFEWS[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- State Law reference— Parking, standing or driving vehicle in private parking areas after request not to do so, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252. 
Sec. 62-131. - Juvenile curfew authorized. (a)  It is unlawful for any person 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; however, on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; (3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity or entertainment, school-sponsored or school-related sports event, recreational activity or dance; (4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time; (5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; (6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with travel through the city excepted in all cases from the curfew. Any acts made unlawful by the provisions of this section shall be subject to the juvenile code of this state. (b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age or younger to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) of this section within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsection (a). Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to such punishment as the municipal court may impose, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (c)  The chief of police shall be required to submit a quarterly report for up to one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives to the city council to monitor the continuing need and effectiveness of this section. (Ord. No. 94-01, § 1(13-10), 2-3-1994) 
Sec. 62-132. - City parks. (a)  There shall be a curfew observed in city parks from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m., during which time the parks shall not be open for public use unless authorized by the city manager. This curfew shall not apply to any event carried out or sanctioned by the city or authorized by the city manager. (b)  Violations of this section shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-12. (Ord. No. 01-03, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-2001) 
Sec. 62-133. - [Definition.]     For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply: "public place" shall mean any street, highway, alley, or right-of-way, to include sidewalks, any park, playground, mall, or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment, or public accommodation including parking lots, and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land. 
Sec. 62-134. - [Curfew enumerated; exceptions.]     It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: (1)  When a minor is accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; (3)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; (4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; and (5)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate and intrastate travel through the City of Ashburn being excepted in all cases from this ordinance. 
Sec. 62-135. - [Control of minor.]     It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in section 62-132 above within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (5) of section 62-132 hereof. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Ashburn, Georgia. 
Secs. 62-136—62-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CURFEWS WITHIN CITY PARKS 
Sec. 62-151. - [City park curfews.]     There shall be a curfew observed in city parks of the City of Ashburn from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. during which time the parks shall not be open for public use unless authorized by the city manager. Provided, however, this curfew shall not apply to any event carried out or sanctioned by the city or authorized by the city manager. 
Secs. 62-152—62-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
Sec. 62-176. - [Disorderly conduct enumerated.]     Any person committing one or more of the following acts within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: (1)  Fighting or quarreling in such manner and in such place as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or any dwelling, hotel, or other type residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. (2)  Using any indecent, vulgar, obscene, threatening, or abusive language in or near a public place which has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person to whom or of whom the remarks are addressed. (3)  Yelling, shouting, singing, chanting, or making any other loud noise by any means whatsoever, whether by voice, handclapping, stomping, or by mechanical means, on the public streets or other public property or in proximity thereto in such manner and to such extent as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. (4)  Striking or attempting to strike another. 
Sec. 62-177. - [Disorderly intoxication enumerated.]     It shall be unlawful for any person to be disorderly while intoxicated on the streets, sidewalks, or other public places within the corporate limits of the city. The following are declared to be guilty of violating this section: (1)  Any person who while under the influence of alcohol or drugs accosts or forces his company upon another person. (2)  Any person who while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs shall defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city. (3)  Any person who while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; (4)  Any person who while under the influence of alcohol or other drugs shall be loud or boisterous or use profane language or panhandle and who shall refuse to remove himself from the public streets, sidewalks, any other public way or house of commerce or worship, or public conveyances, public halls, theaters, or other public places, when ordered to do so by the police or other lawful authority;     Upon finding of guilt for violation of this section, the offender shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months or a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both, any of the penalties to be in the discretion of the judge. Such punishment may be probated by the magistrate for those offenders desiring to participate in a detoxification or drug rehabilitation program.     Any police or other law enforcement officer, in lieu of incarcerating an intoxicated person for a violation of subsection (3) hereof, may take or send the individual under the influence of alcohol or drugs to such person's home or to a treatment facility. Any such officer so acting shall be deemed to have performed his official duty. Such officer need not formally render charges against the individual prior to taking or sending him to a treatment facility. 
Sec. 62-178. - [Law enforcement acting in official capacity.]     Any police officer or other law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this article is hereby declared to be acting in the course of official duty and is not criminally or civilly liable to any person therefor. 
Sec. 62-179. - [Intoxication not justification for other crimes.]     Nothing in this article shall be deemed to excuse or justify any other crime simply because the perpetrator is intoxicated. Nothing in this article shall repeal, annul, or otherwise affect any law, ordinance, resolution, or rule against drunken driving, driving under the influence of alcohol, or other similar offense involving the operation of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, machinery, or other equipment, or regarding the sale, purchase, dispensing, possessing, or use of alcoholic beverages at stated times and places or by a particular class of persons or any other criminal act. 
Sec. 62-180—62-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LITTER CONTROL 
Sec. 62-185. - Purposes.     The mayor and city council of the City of Ashburn, in furtherance of their responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment, hereby establishes rules and regulations controlling the unsystematic, careless, and indiscriminate disposition of litter throughout the City of Ashburn, Georgia. (Ord. No. 08-04, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 62-186. - Title.     This regulation [article] shall be known and may be cited as "The Litter Control Ordinance of the City of Ashburn, Georgia." (Ord. No. 08-04, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 62-187. - Definitions of terms used in this regulation. (a)  General. Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The use of the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the use of the feminine gender includes the masculine. The word "may" is permissive and is not mandatory. The "council" or "City council" refers to the city council of the City of Ashburn, Georgia. (b)  Specific Definitions. When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section:     City means the duly authorized governing body of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, or the geographical area of Turner County inside the corporate limits of the municipality of Ashburn, Georgia.     Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash, and litter. The use of this term is generic and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer.     Garbage means the by-product of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals.     Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping.     Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges, and liquids, created by factories, processing plants, or other manufacturing enterprises.     Junked vehicle includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck, or other vehicle, or vehicle which does not bear a current license plate.     Landfill means any facility where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or depositing of solid waste occurs.     Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, junked vehicles, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article.     Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway; and any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests.     Refuse means any solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste, or discarded materials of all kinds.     Road or street shall be mutually inclusive and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court, and other thoroughfare, however described or designated.     Rubbish includes waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material, and similar material.     Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. (Ord. No. 08-04, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 62-188. - Litter control. (a)  General. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any road or street or any public or private property in the City of Ashburn, unless: (1)  The property is designated by the state, city, county, or by any of their agencies for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; (2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of litter; or (3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. (b)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley, or other public place of travel, not upon any private property except with the written consent thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. (c)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over, or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. (d)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley, or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the city or its designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. (e)  Appliances. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar devise without first removing therefrom the lock or door. This section shall not apply to any appliances, refrigerators, or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped, or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. (f)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any road or street to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. Provided however, this shall not apply to unprocessed agricultural products. (g)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container or dumpster used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its location. (Ord. No. 08-04, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 62-189. - Enforcement. (a)  General. This article shall be enforced under O.C.G.A. § 16-7-45, as amended, said section being entitled "Litter Control Law." (b)  Investigations. Members of the Ashburn Police Department and members of the department of public works of the city shall report all complaints of violations of any of the provisions of this article to the city clerk. (c)  Enforcing officers. The mayor and his/her authorized inspectors and the members of the Ashburn Police Department are authorized to issue a citation against any person violating this article. (d)  Court proceedings. (1)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation by the city attorney. The city attorney shall serve as prosecuting attorney. (2)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the Municipal Court of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, and shall be tried in accordance with the O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 through 15-10-66. (3)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the mayor and city council from bringing civil action for injunction, mandamus, or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty, or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty, or remedy by law. (4)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (e)  Prima facie case. (1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. (2)  Except as provided in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, and other writings, which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. (f)  Penalty. (1)  Any person violating this article or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: a.  By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00; b.  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public road or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or c.  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he/she has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. d.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. (2)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the judge of the municipal court and required to post bond for his/her future appearance. (Ord. No. 08-04, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-2008) 
Secs. 62-190—62-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - FALSE ALARMS[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-02, §§ 1—8, adopted March 5, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as a new art. IX, §§ 62-201—62-207, was at the discretion of the editor. Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 58. 
Sec. 62-201. - Definitions. (a)  Alarm registration. The alarm registration is the notification by an alarm company or an alarm user to the Ashburn Police Department that an alarm system has been installed and is in use. (b)  Alarm system. An alarm system is a device or series of devices including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon the Ashburn Police Department or Ashburn Fire Department, including local alarm system. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site. (c)  False alarm. A false alarm is the activation of a fire, burglary and/or robbery or personal alarm by other than a medical emergency, fire, unintentional smoke, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire has occurred, no emergency medical treatment is needed or no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarms, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police, firemen or EMTs in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions, acts of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control. (d)  Multiple alarm sites. Multiple alarm sites means more than one alarm system on the premises. (e)  Panic or personal alarm. Panic or personal alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring fire or law enforcement response. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 1, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-202. - Registration (or permit). (a)  Registration required. It shall be unlawful to maintain within the city an alarm system on commercial or residential premises unless the person owning or operating the business or residential location, where such alarm system is maintained, shall file with the police department, a valid alarm registration issued by the chief of police or designee. A separate registration is required for each alarm site (multiple alarm sites). Fire alarms, burglary or robbery alarms, or panic alarms (any combination) on one site will be considered as one registration. (b)  Completed application. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the chief of police shall register the applicant and assign an alarm index number unless the applicant has failed to pay a prior fi. fa. assessment or, had an alarm registration for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. (c)  Alarm registration application. Each alarm registration must include the following information: (1)  The name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; (2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, government entity or apartment; (3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system, i.e., fire, burglary, holdup, panic or other for each purpose whether audible or silent; (4)  Mailing address if different from the alarm site; (5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present, i.e., attack dog, at the alarm site; (6)  Name and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes; and will deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; (7)  Type of business conducted at the alarm site; and (8)  That law enforcement or fire service may be based on factors such as availability of police units or fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. (d)  False application. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. (e)  Transferability. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the chief of police or his designee of any change that alters any information listed on the registration application within five business days. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 2, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-203. - Responsibility of alarm user. (a)  Any commercial premises employing an alarm or system shall post in a prominent or conspicuous place notice of an alarm control company and alarm index number sticker. This index number, which is assigned by the police chief will correspond with a named representative who can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if there are no means of access to the premises. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police, except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to notify the police of an activated alarm and fail to disclose to the police their knowledge or apparent knowledge that the alarm system has been activated due to some electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system. (c)  All alarm users shall be required to respond to the location where the alarm is activated or when requested by the police department or the fire department. The key holder will be given 30 minutes from the time the officer or firemen arrive at the premises to respond to the alarm, unless other arrangements are made through the chief of police. Upon activation, the alarm shall not sound any longer than 15 minutes. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 4, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-204. - Responsibility of the police department. (a)  Ashburn Police Department, the monitoring agency for the false alarm article, will make notification to any owner or occupier of the premises who have violated the article. (b)  The chief of police will issue a written notice of all false alarms to alarm users. This notice is in addition to the notice issued to the key holder answering the false alarm. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 5, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-205. - Exemptions. (a)  There shall be a 30-day grace period following the installation of any new alarm system during which period false alarms shall not be counted. This grace period is provided to allow the installing company or other installer and the user to take necessary corrective action with regard to the operation of the alarm system. A responsible person at a premises must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. (b)  An alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, or police department to test the system. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 6, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-206. - Offenses. (a)  Upon the police or fire units responding to the third false alarm within a 12-month period, the owner or occupier of the premises where said alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given a written notice that any additional false alarms would result in the chief of police assessing a service fee due and payable within 30 days following notice thereof, and treated as any other municipal liability, such as taxes, and issued a fi. fa. and an execution for the owner of the premises for violation of the false alarm article. The violation would result in fees as shown: Number of False Alarms Fee 1 st year 2 nd year 3 through 10 $25.00 $50.00 11 or more 50.00 100.00  (b)  Upon the police or fire department responding to each false alarm, the responding key holder will be advised of the false alarm. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm, the responding officer or firemen will notify the police department and the chief of police will assess a fee to the owner of occupier for violation of the false alarm article. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm after the third false alarm, the chief of police will issue a double assessment. One assessment will be for the owner or occupier for violation of this section, and one assessment will be issued for the owner or occupier for violation of subsection (a). The violation of this section would result in an assessment the same as for the number of false alarms three through ten. (c)  In the event that a commercial owner or occupier fails to register their alarm system, the chief of police will assess a fee of $100.00 to the owner or occupier for violation of the false alarm article. (d)  In the event that an owner or occupier is a corporation or government entity, the summons will be addressed to the corporation or government entity and made attention to a designated individual. It will be the corporation's or government entity's responsibility to inform [the] police department who the designated individual will be. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 7, 3-5-2009) 
Sec. 62-207. - Appeals.     In the event that a location is assessed a false alarm fee, and the owner, business or legal entity does not agree that the alarm activation should be classified as a false alarm, the owner, business or legal entity to appeal the ruling through the proper process as follows: (1)  The proper representative of the owner, business, or legal entity, having or maintaining the alarm system may contact the chief of the agency that responded to the alarm (fire or police) and appeal the ruling. The chief of police or the fire chief will present any documentation on behalf of the city or county. (2)  In the event that the owner, business or legal entity (proper representative) and the chief of police or fire chief are not able to resolve and agree on the alarm classification, the proper representative may request a meeting with the city council to appeal the ruling the chief of police or fire chief will present any documentation on behalf of the city or county. (3)  The ruling of the city council will be final. (Ord. No. 09-02, § 8, 3-5-2009) 
ARTICLE X. - SHOPPING CARTS 
Sec. 62-208. - Declaration of a public nuisance.     Shopping carts that have been removed from the premises of businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the city constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public. They create conditions of blight in the community, obstruct free access to sidewalks, streets and other public rights-of-way, interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, impede emergency services, and create impediments to the flow of water in drainage systems and other waterways when abandoned within drainage culverts and easements. It is for these reasons such lost, stolen, or abandoned shopping carts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this article, or as provided by law. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-209. - Definitions. (a)  For the purposes of this article, the term shopping cart means a basket mounted on wheels or a similar device which is generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transportation of goods of any kind. (b)  Abandoned shopping cart means a shopping cart which is left unattended or discarded upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner. For purposes of this ordinance, any shopping cart left unattended or discarded on any public property shall be presumed abandoned, and any shopping cart left unattended or discarded on any private property shall be presumed abandoned unless the owner or occupant of the private property is: (i) the owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of said shopping cart, (ii) an officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve shopping carts, or (iii) is enforcement personnel retrieving, storing or disposing of a cart pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-210. - Abandoned shopping cart prevention and retrieval plans.     Each retail establishment with ten or more shopping carts is hereby required to develop and implement a specific plan to retrieve its shopping carts that are found throughout the city. Two or more retail establishments may collaborate and submit to the city a single plan. Plans for existing businesses within the city must be submitted to the city within 60 days of the effective date of this article, and must include an effective and specific method of retrieving the retail establishment's shopping carts found throughout the city. All new developments and businesses having more than ten carts shall be required to provide a cart retrieval plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for their facility. The plan must include: (1)  Owner information. The name of the owner; the physical address where the retail establishment is conducted; and the name, address, and telephone number(s) of the owner and all on-site managers, including any changes of such persons. (2)  Shopping carts to be maintained on-site. A description of the manner shopping carts will be maintained on site and the measures that will be implemented to prevent cart removal from business premises. These measures may include, but are not limited to: a.  Installing disabling devices on all carts; b.  Installing bollards and chains around business entrances/exists to prevent cart removal; c.  Providing carts for rental or sale that can be temporarily or permanently used for the purpose of transporting purchases; or d.  Providing personnel for the purposes of the retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or combination of both. (3)  Employee training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing store managers designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the plan and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-211. - Compliance.     The effective date of this article shall be July 1, 2018. Within 60 days of the effective date of this article, each retail establishment that utilizes shopping carts in the operation of its business shall affix on each shopping cart, and maintain thereon, information identifying the name of the retail establishment. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-212. - Enforcement.     The provisions of this article shall be enforced by code enforcement personnel. In the enforcement of this article, enforcement personnel may enter upon public property which the city owns or has a right to enter to examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a shopping cart and remove, or cause removal of, a shopping cart, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. Any retail establishment that fails to timely submit a plan shall constitute a violation of this article, and subject to penalties. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-213. - Penalties for violation.     Failure for any business to comply with the requirements of this article shall result in a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) 
Sec. 62-214. - Effective date and repealing language.     This article shall take place immediately upon adoption of the ordinance from which it derives. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. (Ord. No. 18-05, 6-7-2018) Editor's note— Section 62-211 provides for an effective date of July 1, 2018 for this article. 
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; historical preservation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; zoning board of appeals, app. A, § 12. State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GREATER TURNER PLANNING ADVISORY COMMISSION[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 66-31. - Purpose; creation.     In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the City of Ashburn and Turner County which will, in accordance with existing and future needs found in adopted and amended comprehensive plans, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Greater Turner Planning Advisory Commission is created and established; and the planning advisory commission shall be organized and empowered as specified in this article. (Ord. No. 97-01, 5-1-1997) 
Sec. 66-32. - Membership.     The planning advisory commission shall consist of 12 members. The City of Ashburn and the Turner County Commission shall each select five members; and the Cities of Rebecca and Sycamore shall each select one member. The terms of the members shall be for four years; except that in the appointment of the first planning advisory commission under the terms of this article, the City of Ashburn and Turner County shall have one four-year appointment, one three-year appointment, two two-year appointments, and one one-year appointment. The Cities of Rebecca and Sycamore shall each have one four-year appointment. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the unit of government, which shall also have the authority to remove any appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Ord. No. 97-01, § 1, 5-1-1997) 
Sec. 66-33. - Organization, rules, staff, finances.     The planning advisory commission shall elect its chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning advisory commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of a member city or the county. The planning advisory commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning advisory commission shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning advisory commission shall be a public record. The planning advisory commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with public or private consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning advisory commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purposes by the governing authorities of the cities and the county. (Ord. No. 97-01, § 2, 5-1-1997) 
Sec. 66-34. - Powers and duties.     From and after the time when the planning advisory commission shall have been organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the planning advisory commission shall function only in an advisory capacity to each of the respective governing authorities and perform such additional functions and services for and on behalf of each governmental entity as shall be authorized or directed from time to time by the governing authority. The planning advisory commission's duties and responsibilities shall include but are not limited to the following: (1)  To research, review, conduct hearings and make recommendations to the appropriate board and councils on updates and amendment to the 2015 Greater Turner Comprehensive Plan. (2)  To work with various public and private organizations and agencies engaged in or interested in planning and development activities so as to provide leadership in identifying and implementing city/county goals and policies for planning and development. (3)  To advise member units of government on environmental, public health, safety and general welfare matters, which will include advisory recommendations of land development codes and ordinances. (Ord. No. 97-01, § 3, 5-1-1997) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— The city has entered into an agreement with the Solid Waste Management Authority of Crisp County regarding the collection, hauling and disposal of solid waste within the city. A copy of the agreement, which is dated July 26, 1996, is on file in the city clerk's office. Cross reference— Disposition of dead rabid animals, § 14-179; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 86. State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE 
Sec. 70-31. - Definitions.     For the purpose of these regulations the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:     Collector means a person who under formal agreement, verbal or written, with or without remuneration, does the work of collecting and/or hauling solid wastes.     Disposal area means the designated public landfill.     Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fowl, fruit, or vegetables.     Hazardous waste means material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs other than normal household use, pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive material, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, that the administrative officer may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in the rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources—Rules and Regulations of Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-1-1.     Industrial waste or industrial solid waste means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants, and manufacturing enterprises, and including food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing wastes, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products wastes, land clearance wastes, and similar wastes.     Premises means land, buildings, or other structures, vehicles, water craft, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored.     Rubbish means a variety of combustible waste not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas, and institutions and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, bedding, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials.     Scavenging means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials.     Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and including garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, tunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes, and any other wastes in a solid or semi-solid state not defined in this section.     Waste means unwanted or discarded material except human body waste. 
Sec. 70-32. - Service established.     The city council, in order to protect the health and safety of the people in the city, authorizes and directs the city manager, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of these regulations, to control the storage, collection, and disposal of solid waste in the city. The city manager, with approval of the mayor and city council, may plan, procure equipment and personnel, and manage a publicly owned and operated solid waste collection and disposal service and/or establish criteria for the evaluation of private collection and disposal services, and may make recommendations to the mayor and council regarding contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal site owners and/or operation of public or private solid waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods, and sites. 
Sec. 70-33. - Functions of the mayor and city council.     Collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall have authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of solid waste storage containers, and such other matters pertaining to collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste as they may find necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of these regulations. 
Sec. 70-34. - Appeals.     Any person aggrieved by a requirement of or fee charged for any city utilities services shall have the right of appeal to the city council which may confirm, modify, or revoke any such requirement or fee. 
Sec. 70-35. - Containers. (a)  All garbage, ashes, and rubbish shall be placed in a container. Such container shall be provided by the customer and shall be approved by the city. (b)  Containers failing to comply with these provisions or with sharp or jagged edges or with defects liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced. (c)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste storage and disposal shall be used to contain garbage and rubbish for storage and collection. Disposal bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
Sec. 70-36. - Pre-collection practices.     Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquid before being placed for collection. 
Sec. 70-37. - Waste storage. (a)  No person shall place any solid waste in any street, public place, roadway, or private premises except when it is in proper containers for collection or under the express prior approval of the mayor and city council. No person shall place any solid waste in any stream, lake, or other body of water. (b)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the city manager shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and may be abated as provided in section 70-33, hereof. 
Sec. 70-38. - Scavenging.     No person other than the owner thereof, an agent or employee of the city, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof. 
Sec. 70-39. - Pick-up schedule. (a)  In residential and commercial areas not more than ten days and not less than seven days shall elapse between one collection and the next, and routes of collection shall be arranged so that collections shall be made on the same day of each succeeding week. (b)  Collections shall not be made on city holidays as named in the City Code of Ordinances, unless otherwise specified by the city manager. 
Sec. 70-40. - Private collectors—License required.     No person shall contract for the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste who does not possess a current license for such business operation in the city. Applications for licenses shall be written and shall be considered after evidence has been presented to show that the applicant has received a current permit, appropriate to the type of business concerned, as required under Solid Waste Regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources—Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-1-1. 
Sec. 70-41. - Same—Contract collectors. (a)  Subject to city council approval, any person may contract with the city to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, or disposing of solid waste, provided such persons have applied for and obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-1-1. (b)  Persons contracting for solid waste collection shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city and shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal, and shall execute a bond to the city in the sum of not less than $25,000.00 with a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in the state, to be approved by the city council, which shall establish conditions for the full and faithful performance of all agreements and covenants in such contract. 
Sec. 70-42. - Cleanliness of vehicles; construction, covering, etc.     Vehicles to be used on streets and roadways for solid waste collection, transportation, or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the Motor Vehicle Division of the Georgia Department of Public Safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked, or blown from the vehicle. The outside of the body shall be painted and identified by the name, telephone number, and permit of the person owning the collection business in letters and numbers not less than three inches high and easily legible. 
Sec. 70-43. - Solid waste classified for disposal. (a)  Acceptable solid waste: The following classes of solid waste shall be acceptable for disposal at publicly owned and operated disposal sites. (1)  Garbage, as defined in section 70-31 hereof. (2)  Ashes, the residue from burning of combustible materials for fuel. (3)  Rubbish, as defined in section 70-31 hereof. (b)  Unacceptable solid waste : The following classes of solid waste shall not be acceptable for disposal at public expense on publicly owned and operated disposal sites: (1)  Limbs, cuttings, and other yard trimmings not in the container normally used for the normal and ordinary collection of solid waste by the household. (2)  Building waste, large quantities of materials resulting from the construction of demolition of building, such as plaster, mortar, broken masonry, scrap lumber, roofing, or similar materials. (3)  Industrial waste, solid or semi-solid waste resulting from industrial processes. (4)  Dead animals over 30 pounds. (5)  Hazardous waste as defined in section 20 hereof. 
Sec. 70-44. - Private disposal sites—Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under such person's ownership and control any solid waste without having first obtained a disposal area permit as required by regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources—Rules and Regulations for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-1-1. 
Sec. 70-45. - Same—Inspection.     The mayor or an authorized representative of the state department of natural resources shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with these and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
Sec. 70-46. - Service charges. (a)  The City Council of the City of Ashburn shall adopt from time to time a fee for residential and commercial customers. (b)  The owner or occupant of each residential or commercial unit shall be billed for the fee collected under this article. The occupant shall be billed monthly by the city showing the amount due and payable. The bill for solid waste services, together with the bill for other utility services, shall constitute the utilities bill for the city. 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; property numbering, § 18-61 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; floods, ch. 46; obstruction of streets, sidewalks, similar locations, § 62-2; loitering and prowling, § 62-71 et seq.; planning, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipalities may permit enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); restriction on use of traffic control monitoring devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-14-21. 
ARTICLE I. - PARADES 
Sec. 74-1. - Parades. (a)  Registration and permit. Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade as defined herein shall be required to register such parade with the chief of police at least 24 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. (b)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, "parade" shall mean any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. (c)  Application. Application for a permit to conduct a parade, attached hereto as "Attachment A," shall be made to the chief of police in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: (1)  The date and time proposed for the parade; (2)  The route of the proposed parade; (3)  The number of vehicles, if any, and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; (4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and (5)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person making the application for a parade permit. (d)  Review of application. The chief of police shall forward the application to the mayor who shall review the information set forth in the application; shall ascertain the extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; shall determine the availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and shall determine the light of these circumstances whether or not the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. (e)  Disposition. In the event the mayor determines, in view of the circumstances set out in subsection (d), that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, the mayor shall grant the parade permit. In the event the mayor determines, in view of the circumstances set out in subsection (d), that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, the mayor shall deny the request for a parade permit. The mayor shall note on the application the reasons for the denial of the permit and shall indicate such changes in the time, place, and manner of the parade which would allow it to proceed without unreasonably burdening and interfering with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. In the event the changes in the time, place, and manner of the proposed parade are acceptable to the applicant, the permit shall be issued. The mayor shall cause the applicant to be notified of the disposition of the application as soon as possible. (f)  Judicial review. In the event judicial review of the denial of an application for a parade permit is sought, the city waives trial by jury and waives all applicable time limits so that the matter may be presented to the judge of any court having jurisdiction for immediate decision. (g)  Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral, nor shall it apply to any parade sponsored in whole or in part by the city. Editor's note— "Attachment A" is not included herein but is available for inspection in city offices during business hours. 
Secs. 74-2—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2011-05, adopted April 7, 2011, repealed art. II, Interstate Signs, §§ 74-31—74-35, which pertained to generally, prohibited signs, regulations for specific types of signs, and variances. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
Secs. 74-31—74—50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPLAY OF GOODS OR MERCHANDISE 
Sec. 74-51. - [Display of goods in public places prohibited.]     It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city limits as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale. 
Sec. 74-52. - [Lawful displays require city council approval, regulation.]     Any adjoining property owner upon application and approval by the city council may display goods and merchandise for sale on the sidewalks immediately adjacent to their property. The display and sale of merchandise, including the sale and service of food and beverages, shall not impede the free flow of traffic. 
Sec. 74-53. - [Right not conferred by article.]     The adoption of this article shall not confer any right to any property owner to display merchandise on the sidewalk, and any application or permit granted may be denied by the city council if in the sole judgment of the council the display of merchandise is an impediment to the free flow of traffic, is unsightly or offensive, or in any way threatens the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
Sec. 74-54. - [Exemptions.]     This article shall not prohibit the sale of goods and merchandise during festivals and other public events that are approved and sanctioned by the city council by resolution. 
Secs. 74-55—74-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 
DIVISION 1. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 74-60. - Intent and purpose.     The City of Ashburn, Georgia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, Construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraph 1 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-34-2 and 32-4-92 has adopted this ordinance for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-61. - Scope.     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-62. - Definitions.     For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.     City means the City of Ashburn, Georgia.     City council means the legislative governing body of the city.     Codified ordinances means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Ashburn, Georgia.     Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way.     Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavation, obstruction, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way.     Director means the city manager of the City of Ashburn, Georgia, or his or her designee.     Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property.     Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying and Facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way.     Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement.     Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employees(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto.     Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances.     Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. Rights-of-way shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration.     Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city.     Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof.     Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests.     Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way.     Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities.     Utility or utilities means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor, sub-contractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility.     Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 2. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGISTRATION 
Sec. 74-63. - Administration.     The city manager or his/her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this article except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-64. - Rights-of-way occupancy registration. (a)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. (b)  Following the effective date of this article, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under this control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-65. - Registration procedure.     The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: (1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.) street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone can facsimile numbers of the owner. (2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) is an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. (3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. (4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorized the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-66. - Issuance of written acceptance of registration. (a)  If a registration is incomplete, the city manager shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city manager shall so notify the utility in writing. (b)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey the title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 3. - NOTIFICATION TO CITY OF CONSTRUCTION 
Sec. 74-67. - Notification required.     Written notification to the city manager from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities: (1)  Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or (2)  Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-68. - Notification procedure.     The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the city manager and shall specifically include: (1)  The name and address of the utility; (2)  The nature, extent and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as describe in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; (3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; (4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); (5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; and (6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-69. - Locate requests required.     As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating Facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY 
Sec. 74-70. - Failure to comply.     Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. (1)  Standards. The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Document), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city manager or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to State personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city of municipal equivalents. (1)  Protection of traffic and roadway. In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. (3)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the even the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. (4)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a bested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 
Sec. 74-71. - Liability of utility for restoration of facilities.     A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 6. - DISCONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS, ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES 
Sec. 74-72. Discontinuance of operation. (a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: (1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this article and any other provision in the Codified Ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; or (2)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; or (3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the city manager; or (4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or (5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: a.  Purchase the facilities; b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. (b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above subsection shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 7. - TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION 
Sec. 74-73. - Default.     The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The city manager shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: (1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; (2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; (3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or (4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-74. - Failure to cure a default.     If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the city manager decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: (1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. (2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 8. - PENALTIES 
Sec. 74-75. - Violation and penalties.     Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER PROVISIONS 
Sec. 74-76. - Severability.     If ay section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-77. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers.     The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's Codified Ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-78. - Compliance.     No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-79. - Appeals.     All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director of public service as specified in this article. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-80. - Codification.     The ordinance from which this article derives shall be codified in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-81. - Division headings.     Division headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this article. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-82. - Incorporation of preamble.     The preamble to Ordinance No. 08-15 is hereby incorporated into this article as if set out fully herein. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Sec. 74-83. - Severability.     The section, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared illegal by the valid judgment of any court or competent jurisdiction, such illegality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this article. (Ord. No. 08-15, § 1, 12-4-08) 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-31 et seq. State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
ARTICLE I. - PROPERTY TAXATION 
Sec. 78-1. - Administration. (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk (ex-officio treasurer, tax receiver, tax collector) shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection, and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures hereinafter set forth. To the extent this article fails to provide a designated procedure, said officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. (b)  In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as finally determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes. (c)  Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the mayor and city council shall, by resolution, adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to adoption of said millage rate, the governing body shall publish the notice of any proposed ad valorem tax rate as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. (d)  The city clerk shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the county tax digest by regular U.S. Mail, with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100 percent), and its taxable value (40 percent of fair market value), and the amount of tax due thereon. The bill shall also state the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 78-2. - Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. (a)  All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date set forth in the ordinance imposing the tax or assessment. (b)  All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States; except where specially authorized by law or ordinance of the mayor and council, no partial payments shall be accepted. (c)  Taxes and special assessments shall bear annual interest at the rate of three percent above the federal prime rate. In 2016, this rate shall be .542 percent assessed each month from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The city clerk may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that he/she reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to the action or inaction of his/her department. (Ord. No. 16-06, § 1, 8-4-2016) 
Sec. 78-3. - Penalties. (a)  All penalties imposed by this article are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed, and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this article. (b)  In any instance in which any taxpayer fails to pay a tax or assessment within 120 days of the due date, the taxpayer shall pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest as specified herein. Where the taxpayer continues to fail to pay a tax or assessment beyond the initial 120 days, this penalty shall increase by five percent every 120 days, however the maximum penalty that may ever be imposed is 20 percent of the principle amount due. (c)  The mayor and council may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this ordinance to the extent said body finds and determines the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this article. (Ord. No. 16-06, § 2, 8-4-2016) 
Sec. 78-4. - Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. (a)  As soon as the last day for the payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the city clerk shall notify in writing the taxpayer of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days, an execution shall be issued. (b)  The city clerk shall issue executions for the non-payment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (a) immediately above. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi.fa. (taxpayer), the year(s) for which delinquent taxes are being executed, and the amount thereof. Executions shall be directed to "all and singular sheriffs and constables of the state." (c)  The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be recorded on the general execution docket of the county where the property is located, in the case of real property, and, in the case of personal property, in the county of the taxpayer's residence if a resident of the state, otherwise in the county where any real or personal property of the taxpayer may be found. If the taxpayer is not a resident of the state and has no known real or personal property within the state, the execution shall be recorded in the county in which the act or activity giving rise to tax liability took place. (d)  All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this article for past due taxes and assessments. (e)  The city clerk shall cause all executions issued to be placed in the hands of the city marshal for collection or levy and sale of property. The marshal shall exercise his best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties, and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi.fa. In the event he is unable to do so, the marshal shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the defendant in fi.fa.'s property, whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 78-5. - Levy of executions; sale of property. (a)  The chief of police of the city is hereby designated as marshal of the city and delegated the duties set forth in this article. The marshal shall be subject to being ruled for money in his hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the municipality. After first paying the city clerk the amount due on the process under which the sale was made, the marshal shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi.fa. (b)  In all cases of levying on real property, within five days of such levy written notice of the levy must be given personally, or delivered by certified mail, to the defendant in fi.fa. and to any tenants in possession. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the marshal shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi.fa. therein. (c)  Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessments, it shall be the marshal's duty before proceeding to advertise the property for sale to give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the record owner(s) of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or, when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner(s) of the land, the year or years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of the taxes due, together with accrued costs. The marshal shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where, and to whom the notice was delivered. The marshal shall file the copy with the city clerk. (d)  When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the marshal in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi.fa. shall be given at least ten days' written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be addressed to the taxpayer at the last known address listed in the records of the county tax commissioner. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the marshal shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the secretary of the treasury or his delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. (e)  The marshal shall publish weekly for four consecutive weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place, and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the name(s) of the owner(s) of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the city and the year(s) for which taxes have been executed. (f)  Sales of property under execution shall be made by the marshal before the City Hall on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time, whichever is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided, however, should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day or Independence Day, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions and neither the marshal conducting the sale, nor the City of Ashburn, shall make any representations or warranty of title, condition, or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. (g)  The marshal shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash and, upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the marshal to do so, shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the marshal either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property, or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this article shall convey the title as effectually as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final; real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi.fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy and sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited in the instrument. The marshal shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold; provided, however, the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. (h)  Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property sold for taxes after the property has been offered a reasonable time, the marshal may either re-advertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The marshal shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
Sec. 78-6. - Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. (a)  If, during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered a reasonable time, no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county, and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the marshal's cost due on the sale, then the city manager or his/her designee, may purchase the property for the city. If the city purchases property at a sale, the marshal shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city manager. The marshal shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. (b)  Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder; however, when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided in section 78-9 herein. (c)  The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth in section 78-9 herein. 
Sec. 78-7. - Accounting by marshal; final return or settlement. (a)  The marshal shall make a prompt accounting to the city clerk for all executions placed in his hands for collection or levy and sale. The marshal shall pay over to the clerk all amounts due the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties, and costs, and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs, and all expenses of a sale, it shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. (b)  In any event, within 90 days from the date executions are placed in his hands, the marshal finds an execution to be either uncollectible or not collectable in full, he shall so notify the city clerk in writing. It shall be the duty of the clerk to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket of the county upon their final payment or collection. 
Sec. 78-8. - Garnishment by city; reduction of executions to judgment. (a)  Whenever the marshal can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi.fa. on which to levy any tax execution in his hands, he shall make an entry to that effect on the execution. The city clerk, in the name of the city, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he or she believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi.fa. or who has property, money, or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi.fa. The clerk shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. (b)  When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of "nulla bona" has been duly entered by the marshal on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period and the city clerk has reason to believe the defendant in fi.fa. may have or may come into ownership or assets outside the state, the clerk, in the name of the city, may petition the superior court of the county in this state in which the defendant in fi.fa. maintains a known residence, place of business, or agent to receive service, to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi.fa. does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. 78-9. - Redemption rights of defendant in fi.fa.; vesting of title in grantee. (a)  Whenever real property is sold for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi.fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-42, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the sale until the right to redeem is foreclosed by the giving of the notice provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-45, which Code sections by reference are incorporated herein as a part of this article. (b)  Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a tax sale has not been given as required in paragraph (a) immediately above, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed in the county where the property is situated, provided the defendant in fi.fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. In the event the defendant in fi.fa. is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
Sec. 78-10. - Costs. (a)  For issuing executions, the city shall receive only an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the Clerk of Superior Court for recording and cancellation of the tax fi.fa. (b)  Once a levy is made or posted on the property of a defendant in fi.fa., in addition to all taxes, interest, penalties and costs heretofore accrued, the marshal shall collect a levy administration fee of five percent of the taxes due or $250.00, whichever is the lesser; however, no levy administration fee shall be less than $50.00. (c)  In addition to the levy administration fee, after levy but prior to the sale, the marshal shall collect his actual costs for advertising the same, postage and service fees actually incurred, and any attorney's fees incurred in examination of title to property, plus a commission for conducting the sale, not to exceed eight percent on sums of $50.00 or less, six percent on sums above $50.00 up to $550.00, and three percent on all sums exceeding $550.00. (d)  The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as a part of the redemption price. 
Sec. 78-11. - Ad valorem tax. (a)  The city council shall assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. (b)  The city council shall use this revenue to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. (c)  The millage rate for the city property tax shall be 10.999. The city property tax must be paid by December 20, 2018. If the taxpayer fails to pay within 120 days, then the city shall be authorized to collect the penalties and interest set forth in section 78-3 of the Ashburn Code of Ordinances. (d)  The city property tax shall be paid in one lump sum by the due date specified above; however, the city council authorizes the voluntary payment of city property taxes prior to the time when due. (Ord. No. 06-05, §§ 1—4, 8-3-2006; Ord. No. 10-05, §§ 1—4, 8-5-2010; Ord. No. 12-04, §§ 1—4, 8-9-2012; Ord. No. 13-02, § 3, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 14-05, §§ 1—4, 8-21-2014; Ord. No. 15-08, §§ 1—4, 8-20-2015; Ord. No. 16-08, §§ 1—4, 8-8-2016; Ord. No. 17-03, §§ 1—4, 8-24-2017; Ord. No. 18-10, §§ 1—4, 9-6-2018) 
Secs. 78-12—78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURERS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 78-31. - License fees.     There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 78-32, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 78-32. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 78-33. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers not otherwise licensed.     There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 78-31 in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 78-34. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers.     There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 78-31. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 78-35. - Gross premiums tax imposed on all other insurers.     There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 78-31. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 5) 
Sec. 78-36. - Due date for license fees.     License fees imposed in sections 78-31 and 78-32 shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. (Ord. of 12-1-1994, § 6) 
Secs. 78-37—78-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 1—8, adopted June 4, 2009, repealed the former art. III, §§ 78-71—78-73, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-01, adopted July 6, 1995. Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. State Law reference— Tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq.; local excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 78-71. - [Levied.] (a)  Effective at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of July, 2009, there is hereby levied, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), and during the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2009, and subsequent fiscal years, an excise tax in the amount of eight percent of the charges for the furnishing for value to the public of a room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished by all persons and legal entities licensed by or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which a room, rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly or periodically furnished for value. (b)  Each person or entity subject to the tax herein levied shall make a report to the city manager on or before the tenth day of each month of the room occupancy and taxable charges for the previous month, following procedures established by the city manager, and the tax herein levied shall be due and payable monthly no later than the twentieth day of the month following the month for which the tax is collected. Each person or entity subject to the tax herein levied shall keep sufficient and accurate records of room occupancy and all such taxable charges, using an accounting method and system approved by a certified public accountant, and no later than 30 days following the end of the each fiscal year shall submit to the city manager an accounting statement, certified as complete and accurate by a certified public accountant, showing the room occupancy and receipts for each month during the fiscal year. If such certified records of account are not kept, the defaulting party shall be subject to a penalty equal to 50 percent of the taxable proceeds as shown on the monthly reports for each month during which the default has continued. If the annual certified accounting report is not submitted at the end of the fiscal year as herein required, the defaulting party shall be subject to a penalty equal to 50 percent of the total amount of taxable proceeds shown on its monthly reports for the year. (c)  The city shall have the right to audit the records of each entity subject to the tax herein levied, including the room occupancy records. In addition to all other penalties, the failure to keep accurate accounting records certified by a certified public accountant of room occupancy and the receipts from charges therefrom shall be an offense punishable by the municipal court by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 12 months. Each day such offense continues shall be a separate offense, punishable as provided above. Furthermore, the failure to file the annual certified accounting report at the end of the fiscal year as herein required shall be an offense punishable by the municipal court by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not more than 12 months. (d)  In each fiscal year during which the tax levied herein is collected, that portion of the proceeds collected from the tax equal to at least 50 percent of the total amount of taxes collected that exceed the amount of taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended for promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows in the manner provided by an annual budget plan adopted by the city specifying how such proceeds shall be expended, or an annual budget plan specifying how such funds shall be expended adopted by an entity qualified to do so by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b) and (e) under a contract with the city and pursuant to a budget plan submitted by the entity to the city and made by the city a part of its budget plan for the expenditure of the funds. (e)  In each fiscal year during which the tax levied herein is collected, that portion of the proceeds collected from the tax equal to the taxes that would be collected at the rate of five percent shall be expended in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1(a)(3). (f)  Prior to each fiscal year, the city shall adopt a budget plan specifying how the proceeds of the tax shall be expended. The city's budget plan shall incorporate the annual budget plan or budget plans adopted by one or more entity with which the city contracts for the expenditure of the proceeds of the tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. (g)  The tax authorized and levied by this article shall not apply to those persons and entities excepted from the tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h), as amended from time to time. (Ord. No. 09-03, §§ 2—8, 6-4-2009) 
Secs. 78-72—78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Sec. 78-101. - Levied.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Secs. 78-102—78-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 78-126—78-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - E-911 DISPATCH SERVICE DISTRICT 
Sec. 78-151. - [Special district created.]     There is hereby created in and for the City of Ashburn a special district composed of the entire corporate limits of the City of Ashburn for the purpose of providing E-911 services within such special district and for the purpose of levying a special assessment to defray the cost of implementing, operating, and maintaining such service. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-152. - [Assessment levied.]     There is hereby levied a special assessment of $1.50 per month on each dwelling unit within the district and the contents therein, levied and assessed against the owners and the occupants thereof, and against the real property and the contents therein, and $1.50 per month on each business unit within the district and on the contents therein, levied and assessed against the owners and the occupants thereof, and against the real property and the contents therein, and $1.50 per month on each non-residential mobile home, levied against owners and occupants thereof and the property and its contents. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 2, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-153. - [Assessment levied—Mobile home parks.]     There is hereby levied a special assessment on each mobile home park and on each area designated by the owner or used by the owner for rental to or use by travel trailers and recreational vehicles, and on the owners thereof, and on the occupants of each space and on each mobile home, travel trailer and recreational vehicle located therein, and on the contents located therein, in the amount of $1.50 per month per space. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 3, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-154. - [Same—Individuals within district.]     There is hereby levied upon each individual who resides within the district and who will not be otherwise required to pay an assessment under the foregoing provisions of this article, and upon the real and personal property of each such individual, a special assessment of $1.50 per month. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 4, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-155. - [Definitions.]     As used herein the term "dwelling unit" means and includes an abode, habitation, house, duplex, apartment, residential mobile home, and any other structure used by human beings as a place of residency, whether occupied or not, and where a building or structure includes more than one such unit, each unit is separate unit upon which said special assessment is levied.     As used herein the term "business unit" means each unit of a commercial establishment, industrial establishment, professional establishment, trade or service establishment, store, organization, or enterprise, whether for-profit or non-profit.     As used herein the term "occupant" means the tenant thereof.     As used herein the term "contents" shall mean and include, in the case of a dwelling unit, the household furniture, appliances, and other personal property located therein, by whomsoever owned, and, in the case of business premises, shall mean and include all furniture, appliances, inventory and stock of goods and merchandise, and other personal property located therein, by whomsoever owned.     In any case where the ownership of any unit otherwise subject to this assessment is such that the owner cannot lawfully be made subject to the assessment, the assessment is levied only upon the occupant, and the lien herein provided shall attach only to the property of the occupant. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 5, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-156. - [Proceeds to fund necessary costs.]     The proceeds from the special assessments described in the preceding sections shall be used for the purpose of defraying the cost of providing E-911/dispatch services within the district, including the acquisition, maintenance, operation, and replacement of facilities, and other necessary costs of operating an E-911/dispatch service. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 6, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-157. - [Collection of assessment.]     It is intended by this article that this assessment shall be collected by adding the monthly assessment to the City of Ashburn utility bill together with charges for water, sewer, solid waste, street assessment and gas, if applicable. Failure to pay the entire amount of the City of Ashburn utility bill may result in cessation of one or more city utility services. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 7, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-158. - [Purpose.]     This article is adopted in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the city and shall be liberally construed to carry out that purpose. (Ord. No. 06-02, § 8, 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 78-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - E-911 PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE CHARGE 
Sec. 78-160. - E-911 charge on prepaid wireless transactions.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless E-911 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. (Ord. No. 11-08, 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 78-161. - Collection of E-911 charge on prepaid wireless transactions.     Prepaid wireless E-911 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. (Ord. No. 11-08, 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 78-162. - Administrative provisions.     The Clerk of the City of Ashburn is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of this ordinance [from which this article was derived] and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), together with the Information Sheet required to be filed with the commissioner, by December 31, 2011. (Ord. No. 11-08, 8-4-2011) 
Sec. 78-163. - Depositing of funds; use of funds.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this city from charges imposed by this article shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained for the receipt of revenues from these charges pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). (Ord. No. 11-08, 8-4-2011) 