THE CODE OF ORDINANCES BEN HILL COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 

BEN HILL COUNTY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Philip C. Jay III Chairman 
O.D. Netter Jr. Vice-Chairman 
Scott Downing 
Bennie Calloway 
Daniel Cowan 
Board of County Commissioners 
____________ 
Frank E. Feild 
County Manager 
____________ 
Donna R. Prather 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the County of Ben Hill, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2000 Code, as supplemented through December 17, 2010, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of county commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Sally E. Raines, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Frank E. Feild, County Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Ben Hill, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Ben Hill Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the County of Ben Hill, Georgia. 2014. 
PART I - LOCAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1914 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 232, which created and established the board of commissioners of the county. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to 1976 Ga. Const. art. VI, § VI, ¶ IV, the term "ordinary" has been changed to "judge of the probate court." Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the term "commissioners of roads and revenues" has been changed to "board of commissioners" and the term "commissioner of roads and revenues" has been changed to "commissioner." 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. (Back)
Sec. 1. - Created; districts. 
(a) Those members of the Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County who are serving as such on December 31, 2001, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2003, the Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County shall consist of five members all of whom shall be elected from commissioner districts described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Ben Hill County is divided into two commissioner districts designated as Commissioner District 2 and Commissioner District 3. Two members of the board shall be elected from each such district. Within Commissioner Districts 2 and 3, there are established Post 1 and Post 2 positions. One member shall be elected from Commissioner District 1 which shall consist of the entirety of Ben Hill County. Commissioner District 2 and Commissioner District 3 shall be and correspond to those two numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as "Plan: benhillcc-2012 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Ben Hill User: Gina" 
(b.1) (1) For the purposes of such plan:
(A) The term "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(B) Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2) Any part of Ben Hill County which is not included in Commissioner District 2 or Commissioner District 3 as described in subsection (b) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3) Any part of Ben Hill County which is not included in Commissioner District 2 or Commissioner District 3 as described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(b.2) On the effective date of this subsection, former Commissioner District 1 shall be new Commissioner District 2 as described in subsection (b) of this section and former Commissioner District 2 shall be new Commissioner District 1 which shall include the entirety of Ben Hill County. 
(c) The member elected from Commissioner District Number 2 shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(d) For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Commissioner District Number 1 shall have two posts to be known as Post Number 1 and Post Number 2 and Commissioner District Number 3 shall have two posts to be known as Post Number 1 and Post Number 2. At the time any person qualifies for nomination or election as a member from Commissioner District Number 1, such person shall designate the district and the post to which he or she seeks election and shall thereafter be qualified for election only to the district and post so designated. At the time any person qualifies for nomination or election as a member from Commissioner District Number 3, such person shall designate the district and the post to which he or she seeks election and shall thereafter be qualified for election only to the district and post so designated. 
(e) Each member of the board shall be a resident of the commissioner district he or she represents and shall be elected by only the voters of the district he or she represents. Vacancies shall be filled by the remaining commissioners' appointing a resident of the vacant district to serve until the next general election at which general election a successor to fill the unexpired term shall be elected. A vacancy shall occur when an elected member of the board dies, resigns, is recalled, or becomes incapacitated or disabled to the extent that he or she fails to attend three successive regular monthly meetings of the board. 
(f) At the November general election in 2002, members shall be elected to represent Post 2 of District 1 and Post 1 of District 3 for terms of office of four years beginning on January 1, 2003, and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. At the November general election in 2004, members shall be elected to represent Post 1 of District 1, District 2, and Post 2 of District 3 for terms of office of four years beginning on January 1, 2005, and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(g) Successors to those members whose terms of office are specified in subsection (f) of this section shall be elected in the November general election immediately preceding the expiration of a term of office, shall take office on January 1 immediately following such election, and shall have terms of office of four years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 88), page 3753; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 694), page 5165; 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 372), page 4206) 
Editor's note— 
The plan referenced in subsection (b) (Plan: benhillcc-2012 Plan Type: local Administrator: Ben Hill User: Gina) has been omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor. It may be found at 2012 Ga. Laws (Act No. 372), page 4206, and is available for public examination in the county offices. 
Sec. 2. - Oath. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that each of the persons as may hereafter be elected as county commissioners shall, before entering upon the performance of their duties, take and prescribe before the judge of the superior court of said county, or the judge of the probate court of said county, an oath to faithfully perform the duties of a commissioner under this Act and under the laws of this State. 
Sec. 3. - Jurisdiction; meetings. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said board of county commissioners and their successors are hereby empowered to exercise jurisdiction over all county matters, set forth by general enactment, as well as all matters specially mentioned in this Act. The said board of county commissioners shall hold their regular meetings on the first Monday in each month at the court house, or some other convenient place in the city of Fitzgerald, beginning on the first Monday in January, 1915; provided that the regular time of meeting may be changed to some other day of the month by order on their minutes, of which due notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of said county; and provided, further, said commissioners may hold separate sessions at any time they may see fit and proper, or may be called together by the chairman of said county board for county purposes. 
Sec. 4. - Quorum. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That a majority of said commissioners shall constitute a quorum to transact business or exercise any powers herein delegated pertaining to the duties of said commissioners. 
Sec. 5. - Repealed. 
(1991 Ga. Laws (Act No. 88), page 3753) 
Sec. 6. - Exclusive jurisdiction of what matters. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said board of county commissioners shall have exclusive jurisdiction when sitting for county purposes over the following subject-matters, to wit.: In building and controlling all property of the county as they may deem expedient according to law. Second. In levying a general tax for general purposes and special taxes for particular or special purposes, according to provisions of the Code and special enactments of the General Assembly. Third. In establishing, altering, building and abolishing all public roads, bridges, ferries in the county of Ben Hill in conformity with law. Fourth. In establishing and changing election precincts and lines of militia districts. Fifth. In examining, settling and allowing all claims against the county of Ben Hill. Sixth. In examining and auditing the accounts of all county officers who receive or pay out moneys of the county or the State and concurrent jurisdiction in renewing, either by themselves or their appointees, all records of county officers as required to be kept by law. Seventh. In making such rules and regulations for the maintenance and support of the poor of the county of Ben Hill, and for the promotion of health, as are permitted by law, and to them may seem right and proper. Eighth. To exercise such other powers over county matters as are not in conflict with existing laws. 
Sec. 7. - Further powers stated. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That said commissioners shall furthermore have power to exercise exclusive and original jurisdiction and control in Ben Hill County over all county matters that are now vested by law in the ordinaries of the counties of the State, so far relating to public roads, bridges, public buildings, property, misdemeanor and other convicts, management of the county jail and its fees, the control and maintenance of its paupers, assessing and collecting taxes, disbursing money for county purposes, and the execution of all laws with reference thereto. 
Sec. 8. - Purchases of supplies, etc.; investigation of complaint; removal from office; appeal, right of; grand jury shall inquire; charge to grand jury. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said county commissioners shall not purchase directly or indirectly materials, livestock, supplies or other articles for any department of the county, from himself or from any co-partnership in which he may be interested either directly or indirectly, nor from any person directly or indirectly in his employ in any capacity whatsoever. 
Whenever twenty-five qualified voters of the county of Ben Hill shall make written complaint on information and belief to the judge of the superior court of said county or to the judge of the probate court that any of said commissioners have been guilty of a violation of the foregoing provisions of Section 8, of this Act, the said judge of the superior court or the said judge of the probate court shall cause to be made before him to whom complaint is made an investigation of said charges at which investigation the accused shall have the benefit of counsel, if desired, and if said judge or judge of the probate court shall find the said commissioner guilty of the violation or violations charged, the said commissioner shall within three days be removed from office by a written order of the said judge or said judge of the probate court trying the charges, which order shall be recorded on the minutes of the board of commissioners, and the said judge of the probate court of the county of Ben Hill shall appoint a successor to said commissioner as provided by Section 16 of this Act. The accused, if tried before the judge of the probate court, shall have the right to appeal to the judge of the superior court, who shall hear the cause without a jury and in a final judgment either in vacation or in term time. Each grand jury charged by law with the duty of investigating the books and records and acts and doings of the county commissioners shall make or cause to be made special investigation with a view of ascertaining whether or not any commissioner or commissioners have been guilty of violating any of the provisions of the first paragraph of this section of this Act, and in such grand jury's general presentments a report must be embodied that such special investigation has been made and the results thereof specifically stated; if such results show that any commissioner or commissioners have been guilty of such violation or violations, then there shall be stated in such general presentments the particulars of such violation and thereupon the court shall proceed to cause to be made before it an investigation as is contemplated in the second paragraph of this section, just as if the complaint therein specified had been made to it, and with the same duty, authority, jurisdiction and power of summary removal. And the judge of the superior court shall, in his charge to each grand jury whose duty it is to make such investigation, before entering upon its work for the term, give specially in charge the provisions of this section of this Act. 
Sec. 9. - Chain gang. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said county commissioners are hereby empowered to establish and maintain a county chain gang for the misdemeanor convicts of said county and for such other convicts as the county authorities are authorized by law to work upon a county chain gang, and to work the same upon the public roads of the county. 
Sec. 10. - Orders or warrants to be signed by chairman; itemized and verified statement to be filed; duty of clerk; filing of statements. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the treasurer of the county of Ben Hill shall not disburse or pay out any of the funds from the county treasury on any order, or warrant, unless the same shall have been signed by the chairman of said board and its clerk; provided, this shall not apply to jury script and such orders drawn by the judge of the superior court or city court of Fitzgerald, in which said judge has exclusive jurisdiction. Before the chairman and clerks shall have the authority to draw any warrant, or order, on the treasurer of the county for the payment of any money, except in the instances mentioned in the last clause of the preceding sentence, there must be filed by the person in whose favor the order is drawn, an itemized, verified statement of the claim or account, and the claim shall be ordered paid by the action of said board in meeting assembled, which said last fact shall appear on the minutes of the meetings of said board. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 52), page 153) 
Sec. 10A. - Warrants; vice-chairman. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that in the absence of the chairman or by resolution to that effect entered on the minutes of said Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, the vice-chairman shall be authorized and empowered to sign any and all county warrants that may be issued by said board in payment of any legal obligation. 
(1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 204), page 2571, § 2) 
Sec. 11. - Clerk and attorney of board; minutes, records, etc.; statement of disbursements and expenditures to be filed. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the board of commissioners may elect their own clerk and attorney with such pay as the board may allow, and it shall be the duty of said clerk to attend all meetings of the commissioners, and keep in a well-bound book to be provided at the expense of the county, full and accurate records of minutes of all their transactions, to file in order of their date all original orders and other papers, and to arrange and keep in order of their filing all petitions and applications and other papers addressed to said commissioners and to record all orders given or approved by said commissioners for the payment of money by the county treasurer, and all books, files and records by this Act required to be used or kept, shall always be open at the county site for the inspection of any tax payer of the county on demand. 
It shall be the duty of said commissioners to prepare once each three months an itemized statement of all expenditures and disbursements made by them, which statement shall show the number of orders, of warrants drawn by them on the treasurer, the amount of each order or warrant and the person in whose favor same was drawn, and one copy kept of file in the office of said commissioners. Said commissioners shall also cause to be published at the county's expense in the official organ of said county an abstract of each of said itemized statements. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 52), page 153) 
Sec. 11A. - Judge of Probate Court may serve as Clerk of Board of Commissioners. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that the Judge of the Probate Court of Ben Hill County, Georgia, shall be qualified to serve as Clerk of the Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, notwithstanding the fact that he may hold the office of the Probate Court of said County; and the holding of one office shall not be a disqualification to the holding of the other. This does not mean, however, that the Judge of the Probate Court shall be the Clerk of said Board unless he is duly named to said office by an order of said Board duly entered upon the minutes thereof. 
(1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 835, § 2) 
Editor's note— 
1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 263), page 835, § 2, added provisions to 1914 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 232, without designating a section or subsection for same. The editor has designated such section as § 11A 
Sec. 11B. - Deputy clerk. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, shall have the right at any special or regular meeting to appoint a deputy clerk of said board, whose duties shall be as may be defined and set forth by any regulation, rule or order by said board at any regular or special meeting, and that said deputy clerk shall serve at the pleasure of said board and shall be subject to removal from office at any time with or without cause, and a successor may be appointed immediately upon there being a vacancy in said office for any reason whatsoever; but nevertheless said board shall not be required to appoint a deputy clerk but shall be authorized so to do at any time in the discretion of the board a deputy clerk is needful and necessary; and in the event a deputy clerk is appointed such deputy clerk shall have authority to sign county warrants, provided such warrants are also signed by the chairman of the board of commissioners in and for Ben Hill County, Georgia, or the vice chairman thereof. 
(1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 204), page 2571, § 3) 
Editor's note— 
1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 204), page 2571, § 3 added provisions to 1914 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 232, without designating a section or subsection for same. The editor has designated such section as § 11B 
Sec. 12. - Oath and bond of clerk. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said board of commissioners shall require said clerk, before entering upon the discharge of his duties to take the same oath taken by them, and enter into bond with good security payable to said commissioners and their successors in office, conditioned to well and truly perform and do the duties of said office, such bond to be in the sum of $1,000.00, and to be approved by said board. 
Sec. 12A. - Same; oath and bond [of deputy clerk]. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that any such deputy clerk appointed by said board shall, before entering upon the duties of such office, subscribe and file with said board an affidavit that such deputy clerk shall faithfully perform the duties of deputy clerk of said board and comply with all lawful orders and regulations of said board and will subscribe to any other affidavit that may be required by law or public officials of the State of Georgia, and in addition to taking said oath said deputy clerk shall enter into a good and sufficient bond with surety thereon, which shall be an approved surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, which bond shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and payable to the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, conditioned that said deputy clerk shall faithfully perform all the duties required of such deputy clerk and obey all lawful orders and regulations of said board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, and shall faithfully account for all money or property that said deputy clerk may receive belonging to the County of Ben Hill, State of Georgia. The premium on said bond shall be paid by the board. 
(1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 204), page 2571, § 4) 
Editor's note— 
1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 204), page 2571, § 4, added provisions to 1914 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 232, without designating a section or subsection for same. The editor has designated such section as § 12A 
Sec. 13. - Sheriff's duties and compensation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be the duty of the sheriff of said county to attend all meetings of said board, and to serve all processes, orders, writs, or notices issued by said board, for which services said sheriff shall receive such compensation as may be agreed upon by him and the board; provided, however, that if such board and the sheriff cannot agree as to the compensation he is to receive in said duties then the judge of the probate court of the county shall have the right to determine what is proper compensation for his services. 
Sec. 14. - Pay of commissioners, how drawn; exemptions. 
The chairperson of the board shall be paid a sum determined by the board; provided, however, that such sum shall not be less than $200.00 per month or more than $600.00 per month. Each commissioner other than the chairperson shall be paid a sum determined by the board; provided, however, that such sum shall not be less than $150.00 per month or more than $500.00 per month. 
(1914 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 232; 1953 Ga. Laws (Act No. 440), page 2677; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1361), page 3475; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 671), page 3887; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 120), page 3901) 
Sec. 15. - Election and term of office. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that on the third Wednesday in October 1914, and every two years thereafter there shall be elected three commissioners in and for said county, who shall hold office for a term of two years from and after the first day of January following such election and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Editor's note— 
Except for the date of the election, § 15 is superseded by § 1 of this act. The election date specified in this section is superseded by O.C.G.A § 21-2-9. 
Sec. 16. - Vacancies. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all vacancies in said board of commissioners shall be filled by the judge of the probate court of said county. 
Sec. 17. - To be commissioned by Governor. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that said commissioners shall be commissioned by the Governor as provided by law for county officers. 
[Sec. 18. - Reserved.] 
Editor's note— 
This section is reserved at the request of the county pending modification by the Georgia legislature. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1131), page 4989, which created and established the county board of elections and registration. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Sec. 1. - Created. 
Pursuant to the authorization contained in subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)], there is created a Ben Hill County Board of Elections and Registration and said board is empowered with the powers and duties of the election superintendent relating to the conduct of elections and with the powers and duties of the board of registrars relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures in and for Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Sec. 2. - Membership. 
The Ben Hill County Board of Elections and Registration shall be comprised of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of Ben Hill County, and who shall be selected in the following manner: 
(1) One member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party which receives the highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member, and one member shall be appointed by the political party which receives the second highest number of votes within the county for its candidate for Governor in the general election immediately preceding the appointment of the member. Each of such appointments shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of each of such respective executive committees voting at a meeting duly called and held for such purpose. In the event any appointment is not ratified by the vote of a majority of the members of such executive committee at least 60 days immediately preceding the date on which such members are to take office, then the members of the respective executive committees may elect such members by two-thirds majority of the membership at such executive committee at least 45 days immediately preceding the date on which such members are to take office; otherwise, such members shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of Section 4 of this Act; and 
(2) Three members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Ben Hill County, Georgia, and one of said members shall be designated by said governing authority as supervisor of registration and elections and that person shall be the administrator and chairperson of the board and shall carry out all duties of voter registration and elections. Said person shall hold the position of administrator and chairperson for a period of two years. Thereafter, the administrator and chairperson of said board shall be appointed by the governing authority of Ben Hill County as one of the members of said board for a term of two years and nothing shall prevent said governing authority from appointing the same person. 
Sec. 3. - Ineligibility of elective officers. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such elective office, and the position of any such member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for an elective public office. 
Sec. 4. - Affidavit required. 
No person shall take office as a member of the board unless the respective appointing or electing authority files an affidavit with the clerk of the Superior Court of Ben Hill County no later than 30 days immediately preceding the date on which such member is to take office stating the name and residential address of the person appointed or elected and certifying that such member has been duly appointed or elected as provided in this Act. The clerk of the superior court shall record each such certification on the minutes of the superior court and shall certify the name of each appointed or elected member and the name of the supervisor of registration and elections to the Secretary of State and shall provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members within the same time and in the same manner as provided by general law for registrars. In the event any appointing or electing authority fails to make a regular appointment or election within the time specified in this section or in Section 2 of this Act or fails to make an interim appointment or election to fill a vacancy in the board within 90 days after the creation of such vacancy, such regular member or the member to fill such vacancy shall be appointed forthwith by the governing authority of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 5. - Terms; successors. 
The initial members appointed or elected to the board shall serve for a term of office beginning May 1, 1994, and expiring at the end of December 31, 1995, and until the selection and qualification of their respective successors. Thereafter, all appointees shall serve for a term of two years beginning on the first day of January immediately following the expiration of the respective member's term of office and until a successor is appointed or elected and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as provided in this Act. 
Successors shall be appointed in the manner specified in Section 2 of this Act for the appointment or election of the member who is being succeeded. Members shall be eligible to succeed themselves and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of resignation to the respective appointing or electing authority and to the clerk of the Superior Court of Ben Hill County. Members shall also be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause, after notice and hearing, by the appointing or electing authority but otherwise in the same manner provided by general law for the removal of registrars. 
Sec. 6. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the supervisor of registration and elections shall be fixed by the governing authority of Ben Hill County and the compensation of the remaining members of the board shall be likewise fixed and paid by the governing authority of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 7. - Filling of vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member other than the supervisor of registration and elections before the expiration of that member's term of office, whether by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the respective appointing or electing authority shall appoint or elect a successor to serve the remainder of the unexpired term and until a successor is regularly appointed or elected. 
Sec. 8. - Date of taking office; oath. 
The first members of the board shall take office on May 1, 1994. Provisions in paragraph (1) of Section 2 and in Section 4 of this Act specifying the time for performing certain duties before a member takes office are waived for the initial members of the board. Before entering upon a member's duties, each member shall take substantially the same oath as required by general law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
Sec. 9. - Abolishment of previous board. 
Upon the members of the board taking office, the present board of registrars of Ben Hill County shall be abolished and shall deliver to the chairperson of the board, upon his or her written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. The election superintendent of Ben Hill County shall likewise be relieved of any responsibilities pertaining to the conduct of elections and shall deliver to the chairperson of the board, upon his or her written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
Sec. 10. - Powers and duties. 
(a) The Ben Hill County Board of Elections and Registration shall be empowered with all powers and duties relating to the conduct of elections as election superintendent pursuant to provisions of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 21]. 
(b) The Ben Hill County Board of Elections and Registration is empowered with all of the powers and duties relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures as board of registrars pursuant to the provisions of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. title 21]. 
(c) This Act is intended to implement the provisions of subsection (b) of Code Section 21-2-40 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b)] and shall be construed liberally so as to effectuate that purpose. 
(d) The board shall propose an annual budget to the county governing authority for approval or negotiation detailing the expenditures necessary for the execution of its duties. 
Sec. 11. - Poll workers. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in primaries and elections, and such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practicable, from lists provided to the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
Sec. 12. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the board of elections and registration shall be the chief executive officer and shall generally supervise, direct, and control the administration of the affairs of the board pursuant to law and duly adopted resolutions of the board. The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. 
Sec. 13. - Offices, clerical assistants furnished by county. 
The governing authority of Ben Hill County shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices and with such clerical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. 
Sec. 14. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the words "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the same meaning ascribed to those words by Chapters 2 and 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-101 et seq.] unless otherwise clearly apparent. 
ARTICLE III. - FITZGERALD BEN HILL COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
DIVISION 1. - LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this division is an amendment to the 1945 Ga. Const. art. VII, § V, ¶ I, now Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII, as set forth in § 1 of 1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 202), page 1011. The amendment created and established the Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority. The constitutional amendment was continued in force and effect by a Ben Hill County local ordinance, as set forth in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5190; City of Fitzgerald Ord. No. 1079, § 1, 11-12-1984, as set forth in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5326; and a legislative act, as set forth in 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 18), page 3529. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 1. - Created; support; members; property; purpose. 
Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I of the Constitution [now Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII] relating to the taxing power and restriction of contributions of counties, cities and political divisions, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority" which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, its scope and jurisdiction to be limited to the territory embraced by the City of Fitzgerald and the County of Ben Hill. The city and county may contract with the Authority as a public corporation as provided by the Constitution of Georgia. 
Neither the city nor the county is authorized to levy a tax for the purposes of the authority herein created. 
The members of the Authority, their qualifications, terms and method of election or appointment, shall be prescribed by law by the General Assembly. The Authority shall have such duties, powers, and authority as shall be prescribed by law and the General Assembly may pass all other necessary legislation for the implementation of this amendment. 
All lands and improvements thereon, the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures and revenue bonds issued by the Authority, shall be exempt from State and local taxation. 
Said Authority is created for the purpose of developing, promoting and expanding for the public good and general welfare, industry, agriculture, commerce, natural resources, and vocational training and for the making of long-range plans for the coordination of such development, promotion and expansion within its territorial limits. The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia or the City of Fitzgerald and the County of Ben Hill. The Authority is created for nonprofit purposes and all property acquired by the Authority and any funds realized by the Authority shall be used continually and exclusively for the purposes for which the Authority is created. 
DIVISION 2. - AN ACT CREATING THE FITZGERALD AND BEN HILL COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this division is 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 9), page 2003. The legislative act created and established the Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority. The legislative act was continued in force and effect by a Ben Hill County local ordinance, as set forth in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5190; Fitzgerald Ordinance No. 1079, § 1, 11-12-1984, as set forth in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5326; and a legislative act, as set forth in 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 18), page 3529. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq., and 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 9), page 2003. (Back)
Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This Act may be cited as the Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority. 
Sec. 2. - Created. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority, which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall be the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County, the Mayor of the City of Fitzgerald, the president of the Fitzgerald Chamber of Commerce and two (2) appointed members who shall be residents of Ben Hill County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Fitzgerald. Not more than one (1) member shall be appointed from any one family, partnership, or other business organization. Immediately after the effective date of this Act, the Board of Aldermen of the City of Fitzgerald and the Commissioners of Ben Hill County each shall appoint one (1) member to the Authority. For the first appointments, the county shall appoint one person for three (3) years, and the city shall appoint one (1) person for five (5) years. Thereafter all such terms and appointments, except in case of vacancy, shall be for five (5) years. In the event a vacancy occurs in the city appointment, the city shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. In the event a vacancy occurs in the county appointment, the county shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. The Authority shall elect a Chairman and a Treasurer. The members of the Authority shall be entitled to no compensation. The Authority shall appoint from time to time and remove at its sole discretion an Executive Secretary, to be selected by majority vote of the members of the Authority, who shall serve as secretary of the Authority and who shall have such other powers and duties and who shall be paid such compensation as the Authority shall determine from time to time in its sole discretion. 
(1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 190), page 4394) 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a) The word "Authority" shall mean the "Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority" created by this Act and by and under Article VII, Section V, Paragraph I, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [now Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; see division 1 of this article], as amended. 
(b) The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of jobs and payrolls in industry, commerce, agriculture, and natural resources; the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures or equipment to private persons, firms or corporations. 
(c) The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and other such expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation; provided, however, that in no event shall entertainment or promotional expense be considered a part of the cost of any project. It is the intention here that funds the Authority may borrow and the interest paid thereon, for interim or temporary financing for any of the above-named items properly included in "cost of project" for the use of a designated project, pending the issue and validation of revenue-anticipation bonds for such project, shall be considered a "cost of project" which may be paid or repaid from the proceeds of the revenue-anticipation bonds authorized herein in section 6(1). 
Sec. 4. - Contracts. 
The County of Ben Hill and the City of Fitzgerald are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the Authority as a public corporation. 
Sec. 5. - Quorum. 
Any three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than three (3) affirmative votes. No vacancy shall impair the power of the Authority to act. 
Sec. 6. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a) To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure.
(b) To acquire, hold, and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c) To enter into contracts for periods of time not in excess of fifty (50) years.
(d) To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease as lessee or lessor or make contracts with respect to the use of same or to dispose of same in any manner the Authority deems to its best advantage. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Ben Hill or the City of Fitzgerald; the governing authorities of Ben Hill County or the City of Fitzgerald are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. 
(e) To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f) To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rental and sale of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. 
(g) To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate and manage projects and pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue-anticipation bonds or any other income of the Authority, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h) To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing; it being the intention here that, in addition to the pledge of revenue from any project for the payment of revenue anticipation bonds and for the benefit of the bondholders, the Authority is authorized to execute mortgages, deeds to secure debts, trust deeds and indentures and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient covering the property of any particular project as additional security for the bondholders of such project. 
(i) To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j) To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(k) To adopt, alter or repeal its own by-laws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l) To issue revenue-anticipation bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. Such revenue-anticipation bonds shall be issued and validated in the Superior Court of Ben Hill County, Georgia, under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the "Revenue Bond Law" (Ga. Laws 1937, pp. 761-774) [O.C.G.A. § 36-80-60 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds; except, however, the interest rate on or rates to be borne by any bonds, notes, or other obligations of the Authority shall be fixed by the members of the Authority and any limitations with respect to interest rates found in said "Revenue Bond Law" shall not apply to obligations issued by said Authority. 
(1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 344), page 3957) 
Sec. 7. - Powers. 
The Authority is hereby specifically authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire land and to improve and develop same so as to make said land more desirable for industrial purposes. Such land acquisition and development may be undertaken by the Authority at any time whether or not there is at such time a prospective industry considering the purchase or lease of an industrial site in Ben Hill County. Such land and improvements may be held by the Authority for any length of time it deems desirable, but any sale, lease or other disposition of same when made, shall be subject to the provisions of section 9 hereof. 
Sec. 8. - Use of gifts. 
No moneys derived from the Authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses. 
Sec. 9. - Projects. 
All projects of the Authority shall be on a self-liquidating basis, and the Authority shall not make gifts, directly or indirectly to any person, firm or corporation. 
Sec. 10. - Ben Hill County. 
Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Ben Hill County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
Sec. 11. - Taxes. 
All lands and improvements and personal property the title to which is vested in the Authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue-anticipation bonds issued by the Authority, and all interest thereon, shall have the same immunity from State and local taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 12. - Debts. 
The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Ben Hill or the City of Fitzgerald. 
Sec. 13. - Audits. 
The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent auditor. The Authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the County of Ben Hill and the City of Fitzgerald, and shall publish same one time in the newspaper serving as the Official Organ of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 14. - Contracts. 
The Authority shall be specifically authorized to enter into contracts and agreements for periods of time extending beyond the terms of the members of the Authority in office at the time of such contracts and agreements. 
Sec. 15. - Intent. 
This Act being written for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Ben Hill and the City of Fitzgerald and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 16. - Severability. 
The provisions of this Act are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Sec. 17. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately after the enactment thereof by the members of the two branches of the General Assembly. 
Sec. 18. - Repealer. 
All laws or parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE IV. - JOINT FITZGERALD/BEN HILL COUNTY AIRPORT COMMISSION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 203), page 879, which created and established the joint airport commission of the county and city. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Powers of Local Governments as to Air Facilities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 1. - Commission established. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that there be, and is hereby, created, set up and established a joint airport commission for the City of Fitzgerald and the County of Ben Hill to be known as the "Fitzgerald Airport Commission" for the purposes and with the powers, duties and authority hereinafter set out. 
Sec. 2. - Members; ex officio members. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission shall be composed of three members, two of whom shall be aldermen of the City of Fitzgerald to be designated and appointed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Fitzgerald, and one of whom shall be a member of the Board of Commissioners of the County of Ben Hill to be designated and appointed by that body, such members so appointed by the Mayor and Council and the Board of Commissioners to serve for the calendar year in which appointed or until their successors are named and appointed. The Mayor of the City of Fitzgerald and the Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill shall, by virtue of their offices and during their tenure in office as such, be ex officio members of said Commission and shall serve in an advisory capacity without voting power. 
Sec. 3. - Authority of Commission; fees and tolls. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission shall have the management, supervision and control of any airports or landing fields owned jointly by the City of Fitzgerald and the County of Ben Hill and shall direct and control the construction, equipment, improvement, maintenance and operation thereof, including the adoption and enforcement of rules and regulations and the fixing and establishing of charges, fees and tolls for the use of such airports or landing fields. 
Sec. 4. - Contract for construction; liability of City and County. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission, by and with the consent and approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Fitzgerald and the Board of Commissioners of the County of Ben Hill, is authorized and empowered to make and enter into contracts for the construction, development, equipment, improvement, maintenance and operation of any such airports or landing fields, provided, however, that no contract obligating the City of Fitzgerald or the County of Ben Hill for the payment of any monies shall be entered into by said Commission without having been first authorized by resolution duly passed by the Mayor and Council of the City of Fitzgerald and the Board of Commissioners of the County of Ben Hill and provided further that any contract obligating the expenditure of funds shall be a liability of the City of Fitzgerald to the extent of sixty per cent and of the County of Ben Hill to the extent of forty per cent of the total amount provided in said contract, and neither said City nor County shall be liable for the payment of more than its respective portion thereof. Said Commission shall have no authority to bind either the City of Fitzgerald or the County of Ben Hill for the payment of any sum of money unless and until the same shall have been authorized by the proper governing authorities of said City or County. 
Sec. 5. - Lease of airports; approval of governing authorities. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission shall have the right to lease or assign to private persons, firms, corporations, Governmental agencies or political subdivisions all or any portion of the space, area and improvements of and equipment on such airports or landing fields, provided that such lease be submitted to the governing authorities of said City and County and their approval obtained before its execution, and provided that the public is protected in its rightful, equal and uniform use of such airports or landing fields. Said Commission shall have no right to sell such airports or landing fields or any portion thereof, the right so to do being expressly reserved to the governing authorities of said City and County. 
Sec. 6. - Expenses paid from tolls; excess of funds. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all fees, charges, tolls, rentals or other revenues derived from the operation or lease of such airports or landing fields shall be used by said Commission to meet in whole or in part the expenses of operation and maintenance of such airports or landing fields. In the event the revenue from the operation or lease of such airports or landing fields exceeds the expenses of operation and maintenance, such excess may, by and with the consent and approval of the governing authorities of said City and County, be used for further development, improvement or equipment of such airports or landing fields and if not so used shall be paid to said City and County in proportion to their respective interests therein. 
Sec. 7. - Control and expenditure of funds. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission shall have the control and expenditure of funds appropriated by said City and County for the construction, development, maintenance, improvement and operation of such airports or landing fields provided, however, that no funds appropriated by either the City or the County shall be expended until both the City and County shall have appropriated and deposited with said Commission its pro rata portion of the total appropriation. 
Sec. 8. - Books and accounts kept; Clerk. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that said Commission shall keep separate books and accounts showing receipts from all sources and expenditures for all purposes and shall deposit all funds received by it, including appropriations made by said City and County and revenues from the operation or lease of such airports or landing fields, in a bank named as depository for either said City or said County. The Clerk of the City of Fitzgerald shall, by virtue of his office, be and serve as Clerk of said Commission. 
Sec. 9. - Invalid parts. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that, if any section or portion of this Act be declared unconstitutional, the remaining sections or portions hereof shall not be affected thereby. 
Sec. 10. - Repealer. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws or parts of laws in conflict with this Act be, and the same are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICE OF THE TAX COMMISSIONER ESTABLISHED 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1194), page 3954, which created and established the office of the tax commissioner. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Sec. 1. - Created. 
The offices of tax receiver and tax collector of Ben Hill County are hereby consolidated and combined into the one office of the tax commissioner of Ben Hill County. The rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax commissioner, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be the same as those imposed upon tax receivers and tax collectors by the laws of this state. 
Sec. 2. - Elections. 
The first election for the office of tax commissioner created herein shall be held at the same time as the election of other county officers for Ben Hill County in 1980. The person so elected shall take office on the first day of January following his election, and he shall serve until December 31, 1984, and until his successor is duly elected and qualified. All future elections for tax commissioner shall be held at the same time as elections for other county officers, and all future tax commissioners shall take office on the first day of January following their election and shall serve a term of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Nothing herein shall affect the term of office of the present tax collector and tax receiver of Ben Hill County, and their terms of office shall continue through December 31, 1980. Should any vacancy occur in the office of tax commissioner, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of law for filling vacancies in the office of tax collector. 
Sec. 3. - Compensation. 
(a) The tax commissioner of Ben Hill County shall be compensated by an annual salary in the amount prescribed by the general law of this state fixing minimum salaries for tax commissioners who are paid on a salary basis. This salary shall be paid in equal monthly installments from county funds. This salary shall be the sole compensation of the tax commissioner, and all other moneys collected by the tax commissioner shall be public funds. 
(b) All expenses incurred by the tax commissioner in operating and discharging the official duties of his office including the compensation of additional personnel and including office equipment, supplies, fixtures, and utility expenses shall be paid by Ben Hill County from county funds. The hiring of such additional personnel and their compensation shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of Ben Hill County. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 3768) 
Sec. 4. - Disposition of funds. 
All fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments, and perquisites of whatever kind received and collected by the tax commissioner shall be received, collected, and held by him as public funds belonging to Ben Hill County. Once each month the tax commissioner shall turn over to the fiscal authority of said county all funds collected by him with a detailed itemized statement showing the sources from which such funds were collected. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 3768) 
Sec. 5. - Payment due. 
All taxes due and payable to Ben Hill County at the time the tax commissioner takes office shall continue to be due and payable until paid. All tax fi. fas. heretofore issued shall have full force and effect and shall be collectible as issued. 
ARTICLE VI. - COUNTY DEPOSITORY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 286), page 2720, which created and established the office of the county depository. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Deposits of county funds in designated depositories O.C.G.A. § 36-6-16; depositories for county and school district moneys, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14. (Back)
Sec. 1. - First named. 
That from and after January 1, 1970, there is hereby created a county depository in and for Ben Hill County for the purpose of receiving and disbursing of county funds as heretofore received and disbursed by the county depository, the National Bank of Fitzgerald, all of the funds received by the said county to be deposited in said depository. 
Sec. 2. - Others. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the commissioners of Ben Hill County at its first meeting in January, 1970, and in each January thereafter, shall designate as county depository for Ben Hill County any bank or banks, one or more, having its or their office and principal place of business in Ben Hill County as the depository of county funds, and wherever used in this Act, depository shall include the plural as well as the singular. 
Sec. 3. - Indemnity. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the bank or banks so named, before entering upon its duties as said depository, shall deliver to the commissioners of Ben Hill County good and sufficient indemnity to the county, said indemnity to be in such form as required by said commissioners, for the faithful performance of all duties devolving upon said depository under this Act. 
Sec. 4. - Warrants. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the commissioners of Ben Hill County shall have printed and ready for use, as soon after the passage of this Act as practicable, new county warrants in the following form: 
And all warrants issued after the effective date of this Act must be issued according to the above form, and must be signed by the chairman of the county commissioners and the clerk of said board before they are authorized to be paid by the county depository. 
Sec. 5. - Duties. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the county depository as described and created in sections 1 and 2 of this Act be and is hereby authorized to receive and disburse all county funds as heretofore received and disbursed by its county depository. Said depository is further authorized to pay out of any funds on hand in the name of the county upon presentation of the county warrant properly issued and signed upon the regular form as set out in section 4 of this Act. Said depository shall pay out all county funds only upon a regular county warrant, except in such cases where the judge of the superior court of the county has jurisdiction and issues an order upon the county depository, and in that event said depository must secure a county warrant for its record. 
Sec. 6. - Payments. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be unlawful for the depository so named to discount any county warrants drawn upon it. There shall be nothing herein construed to deprive said bank as a corporation from receiving county warrants as collateral against loans made by said bank as a corporation. 
Sec. 7. - Term. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the term of office of the depository so named shall be until its successor is named and duly qualified, unless said depository should fail or cease to exist. Then and in that event, the commissioners of Ben Hill County shall immediately choose another depository, who shall perform the duties of said office as set forth above. 
Sec. 8. - Compensation. 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the depository as designated in sections 1 and 2 of this Act shall receive no compensation for acting as such; but said commissioners shall, if possible, get such depository to pay said county interest on any balance they may have with said depository, for the privilege of acting as such depository. 
LOCAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Local Acts and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, Ben Hill County, Georgia," and may be so cited. This Code shall also be known as the "Ben Hill County Code." 
(Code 2000, § 1-1) 
State law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a) Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(b) Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
(c) Enumeration. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions, the following rules shall govern, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners, commissioners, and county commissioners. The terms "board of commissioners," "commissioners" and "county commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without a seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances, Ben Hill County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1) The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2) The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3) The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" are used, they shall refer to Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the county, whether it shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the county to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in the trade or with reference to the subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be interchangeable. 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number; year, act number and page; year and page; or short title is a reference to such act, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means generally next before unless the context requires a different significance. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used, it shall mean a place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the county, which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the county clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Seating, minimum. Where this Code requires seating for a minimum number of persons, only chairs, stools and booths shall be provided as the required seating. The capacity of seats without dividing arms shall be determined by allotting 18 inches per occupant. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of all illiterate or infirm persons. 
State. Whenever the term "state" is used, it shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes streets, sidewalks, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and all other public highways in the county unless otherwise provided. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense shall include the future. 
Time period. Words using the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2000, § 1-2) 
State law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 2000, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, history notes and editor's notes. 
(a) Catchlines. The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b) History or source notes. The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c) Internal references. All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 2000, § 1-4) 
State law reference— Notes and catchlines of Code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a) The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 2000, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 2000, § 1-6) 
State law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3) Any contract or obligation assumed by the county.
(4) Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee.
(5) Any right or franchise granted by the county.
(6) Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7) Any appropriation ordinance.
(8) Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term.
(9) Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements.
(10) Any zoning ordinance.
(11) Any ordinance dedicating or accepting, or vacating any subdivision plat.
(12) Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county.
(13) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14) Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.
(15) Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county.
(16) Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes.
(17) Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan.
(18) Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect.
(19) Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect.
(20) Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished.
(21) The ordinance adopted August 7, 1977, regulating road construction in subdivisions and the resolution adopted March 8, 1988, relating to the definition of cul-de-sac streets are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the board of commissioners. 
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances, Ben Hill County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, Ben Hill County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________, which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d) All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 2000, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4) Change the term "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d) In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Liability for violations by corporations; other associations. 
(a) Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by the corporation, association or organization. 
(b) Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 2000, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a) In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means:
(1) Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b) In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c) Except as otherwise provided:
(1) A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or any combination thereof. 
(2) With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3) With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4) The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of this Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. 
(d) The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e) Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(1) In every case in which any court in the county, with the exception of any municipal court, shall impose a fine that shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state or any offense against a county ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(2) At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or a violation of a county ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any court in the county, with the exception of municipal courts, shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(3) The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the judges of probate courts retirement funds, or by any other provision of laws. 
(4) The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(5) All such sums collected and paid over to the board of commissioners shall be deposited into a special account, which shall be known as the county jail fund. 
(6) All moneys collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for construction, operating and staffing the county jail, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(7) The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any municipality located in the county. 
(Code 2000, § 1-12; Res. of 1-4-1990) 
State law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(d); maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-12. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b) The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; claims against counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-11-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Elected officials covered by worker's compensation. 
(a) All elected officials shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia group self-insured workers' compensation fund. 
(b) While performing their elected duties, the board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court and tax commissioner, coroner, county surveyor and chief magistrate judge shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state as stated in O.C.G.A. title 34, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 34-9-1 et seq.). 
(Code 2000, § 2-1; Res. of 9-7-1983; Res. of 3-3-1998, § I) 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS (RESERVED) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Local acts reference—Board of commissioners, art. I. 
State Law reference— County a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1. (Back)
Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The county compiles and publishes separately additional administrative regulations in its manual of personnel policies and procedures. The manual incorporates the retirement plan for county employees and includes regulations pertaining to purchasing policies and procedures. An official copy of the manual and associated documentation are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11; expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-11.1, 36-1-21; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5; Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; random drug testing of state employees in high-risk jobs, O.C.G.A. § 45-20-90 et seq.; Public Employee Hazardous Chemical Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 45-22-1 et seq.; Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990, O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.; social security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-44—2-74. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNTY MANAGER 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. (Back)
Sec. 2-75. - Office created. 
There is created the office of county manager. The county manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners to serve at the pleasure of the board for an indefinite term. No member of the board shall be appointed county manager during the term of office for which he is elected or for a period of one year thereafter. 
(Code 2000, § 2-86; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-76. - Qualifications. 
The county manager shall be chosen by the board of commissioners solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications with specific reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office. 
(Code 2000, § 2-87; Ord. No. 93-1, § 2, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-77. - Duties. 
(a) The county manager shall be the chief executive officer of the county and the administrative head of the county government. He shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county except as otherwise provided by law, and it shall be his duty to: 
(1) Appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees of all departments of the county which the commissioners have heretofore been empowered to appoint and discharge, with the exception of the county attorney, the county auditor and the county physician. 
(2) See that all laws and ordinances of the county are enforced.
(3) Exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county the board has exercised or that may be created. 
(4) Prepare and submit to the board an annual budget.
(5) Keep the board fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the county.
(6) Supervise and direct the official conduct of all appointive county officers and department heads, except as may be otherwise provided. 
(7) Attend all meetings of the board with the right to take part in the discussion, but he shall have no vote before the board. 
(8) Supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for the county and to supervise and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for the county within such limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the board. 
(b) The county manager shall be vested with the authority to countersign with the chairperson or, in his absence from the county, the vice-chairperson of the board, all payroll checks for employees of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 2-88; Ord. No. 93-1, § 3, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-78. - Reports. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right to require the county manager to appear before them at any time and make such reports, oral or written, as they deem necessary. 
(Code 2000, § 2-89; Ord. No. 93-1, § 4, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-79. - Bond. 
The county manager shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to the county to be approved by the board of commissioners and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the board of commissioners. The bond shall be delivered to the board within 30 days of the county manager's assuming his duties and upon receipt shall be filed by the chairperson of the board in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 2-90; Ord. No. 93-1, § 5, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-80. - Oath. 
Before entering upon his duties, the county manager shall take and subscribe an oath for the faithful performance of his duties under this division, which oath shall be duly entered upon the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 2-91; Ord. No. 93-1, § 6, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-81. - Removal. 
The county manager shall be suspended or removed at the pleasure of the board of commissioners by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 2-92; Ord. No. 93-1, § 7, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 2-82. - Salary. 
The salary of the county manager shall be set by the board of commissioners on an annual basis. 
(Code 2000, § 2-93; Ord. No. 93-1, § 8, 2-2-1993) 
Secs. 2-83—2-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Local acts references—Board of elections and registration, art. II; development authority, art. III. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-108—2-127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Hospital authority created, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-128. - Declaration of need. 
There is urgent need for the activities of a hospital authority to function in and for the county, and by reason of the existence of the need for hospital and other medical facilities to serve the citizens of the county, a hospital authority is established. 
(Code 2000, § 2-146; Res. of 4-9-1969, § 1) 
Sec. 2-129. - Designation; membership; powers. 
The hospital authority should be known as the Hospital Authority of Ben Hill County, Georgia, and shall consist of not less than five members who shall be residents of the county. The hospital authority shall be deemed to exercise public and essential governmental functions and shall have all the powers granted such authorities by the provisions of the Hospital Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.). 
(Code 2000, § 2-147; Res. of 4-9-1969, § 2) 
Sec. 2-130. - Terms of members. 
There shall be five members appointed to the board of the hospital authority for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. Thereafter the appointees shall serve five-year terms. 
(Code 2000, § 2-148; Res. of 4-9-1969, § 3) 
Sec. 2-131. - Vacancies. 
Appointments to fill vacancies on the board of the hospital authority for either an unexpired or full term shall be made as follows: 
(1) The board of commissioners shall submit a list of three eligible persons to the board of the hospital authority; 
(2) The board of the hospital authority at its next regular meeting shall either select one of the three persons named in such list or decline to select any of the persons named in the list. If the board declines to select any of the persons named on the list, it shall so notify the board of commissioners; and 
(3) Upon receipt of notification that the board of the hospital authority has declined to select any of the persons named in the governing body's list, the board of commissioners shall submit a second list of three eligible persons, no one of whom was named on the first list, to the board of the hospital authority. The board of the hospital authority, at its next regular meeting after receipt of the second list, shall select one of the three persons named in the second list. 
Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Joint authority means the public body corporate and politic constituting a joint development authority. 
(Code 2000, § 2-171) 
Sec. 2-162. - Declaration of need. 
There is determined and declared to be a present and future need for a joint development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1) to function within Ben Hill, Wilcox, Irwin and Telfair Counties. 
(Code 2000, § 2-172; Res. of 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-163. - Activation. 
Effective with the concurrent adoption by the boards of commissioners of Wilcox County, Irwin County and/or Telfair County on or before August 31, 1995, there shall be activated within Ben Hill County, Wilcox County, Irwin County, and/or Telfair County, depending on which boards of commissioners so act, the public body corporate and politic constituting a joint development authority under the Development Authorities Law known as the "Ben Hill-Wilcox-Irwin-Telfair Joint Development Authority," the "Ben Hill-Wilcox Joint Development Authority," the "Ben Hill-Irwin Development Authority" or the "Ben Hill-Telfair Development Authority" or any combination of such terms, as the case may be. 
(Code 2000, § 2-173; Res. of 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-164. - Membership; terms. 
The members of the board of directors of the joint authority shall consist of 12 members so long as four counties participate, or nine members so long as three counties participate, or six members so long as two counties participate, the number of members to be divided equally between the participating counties; and such members for each county shall be appointed by action of the respective board of commissioners of such counties promptly following the determination of whether two or three or four counties shall participate in the joint authority. Members shall serve two-year terms and shall be residents of the county which the appointing board of commissioners represents. 
(Code 2000, § 2-174; Res. of 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-165. - Meetings; business plan. 
The joint authority shall be an active, bona fide authority; shall meet not less often than quarterly, the first meeting to be within three months of August 31, 1995; and shall develop an operational business plan. 
(Code 2000, § 2-175; Res. of 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 2-166. - Powers. 
The board of directors of the joint authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Code 2000, § 2-176; Res. of 6-6-1995) 
Secs. 2-167—2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-186. - Duties and oversight. 
The board of elections of the county is not an entity or agency autonomous from the board of county commissioners. The members of the board of elections serve at the pleasure of the board of county commissioners. The physical offices of the board of elections are a department of the county and its employees are employees of the county. The board of elections shall oversee the registration of voters in the county and carry out those duties as prescribed by the Local Acts of the county and state law. 
Secs. 2-187—2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MEETINGS—ORGANIZATION AND PUBLIC ACCESS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— County a body corporate, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-3; board of commissioners authorized to adopt ordinances for the governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a); organization of county government, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; authority to control property of the county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(1); county property generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-1 et seq.; emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-2-4; code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; Open and Public Meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 2-211. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of all boards and commissions of the county shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings of the board of county commissioners other than executive sessions. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-177)) 
Sec. 2-212. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public hearings, provided that such devices do not interfere with any public hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-179)) 
Sec. 2-213. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the board of commissioners. A quorum is a majority of all of the members of the board then in office. It is the duty of the chairperson to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chairperson if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the chairperson with the approval of the commissioners present. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-180)) 
Sec. 2-214. - Chairperson. 
(a) The chairperson of the board of commissioners, as presiding officer, is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chairperson shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
(b) The chairperson has exactly the same rights and privileges as all other members have, including the right to make motions, speak in debate and to vote on all questions. However, the impartiality required of the presiding officer of an assembly (especially a large one) precludes exercising the right to make motions or debate while presiding, and also requires refraining from voting except when the vote is by ballot, or whenever his vote will affect the result. 
(c) On a vote which is not by ballot, if a majority vote is required and there is a tie, the chairperson may vote in the affirmative to cause the motion to prevail. If there is one more in the affirmative than in the negative, he can create a tie by voting in the negative to cause the motion to fail. Similarly, if a two-thirds vote is required, he may vote either to cause, or to block, attainment of the necessary two thirds. (RONR (10th ed.), p. 392-93; see also Table A, p. 190 of RONR In Brief.) 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-181)) 
Sec. 2-215. - Vice-chairperson. 
The board shall select a vice-chairperson from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chairperson shall fulfill the duties of the chairperson if the chairperson is not in attendance. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-182)) 
Sec. 2-216. - Presiding officer. 
If the chairperson and the vice-chairperson are absent or otherwise unable to serve as presiding officer at a meeting and a quorum of commissioners is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as presiding officer of the meeting until either the chairperson or vice-chairperson is present at the meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-183)) 
Sec. 2-217. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-184)) 
Sec. 2-218. - Amendments to the rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order shall be submitted by a commissioner in writing to the county manager at least three business days before a regular meeting of the board. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all board members. All amendments require a majority vote of the quorum to be adopted. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-185)) 
Sec. 2-219. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires an affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum. Rules governing quorums (section 2-213), voting methods and requirements (sections 2-226 and 2-227), the notification to commissioners of meetings (section 2-220) and rules necessary for compliance with state law may not be suspended; provided, however, that, in the event that a state of emergency is declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may waive time-consuming procedures and formalities imposed by state law. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-186)) 
Sec. 2-220. - Meetings other than regular meetings. 
(a) Special meetings, rescheduled regular meetings and workshops. A regular meeting of the board of commissioners may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chairperson or a majority of the commissioners for any reason. Other special meetings or workshops may be scheduled by the chairperson or at the request of at least two commissioners. 
(b) Meetings with less than 24 hours' notice. When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. Emergency meetings will be called according to law. In addition to the legal requirements for calling an emergency meeting, the county clerk may also give notice of the meeting through any electronic media available. 
(c) Meetings during a state of emergency. When it is imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to hold board meetings at the regular meeting place due to emergency or disaster resulting from man-made or natural causes, as declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may meet anywhere within or outside of the county. 
(d) Effect of action. Any action taken in such meetings shall have the same effect as if performed at the regular meeting site. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-188)) 
Sec. 2-221. - State of the county address. 
The chairperson of the board of county commissioners may, at his discretion, give a state of the county address at the first regularly scheduled meeting of each year. 
Sec. 2-222. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings shall substantially follow an established order of business. The order may be as follows: 
(1) Call to order.
(2) Invocation.
(3) Pledge of Allegiance.
(4) Constitutional officer reports.
(5) Public comments.
(6) Department head reports.
(7) Acceptance of minutes.
(8) Consent agenda.
(9) Old business.
(10) New business.
(11) Adjournment.
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-189)) 
Sec. 2-223. - Agenda. 
The county manager, with the advice of the chairperson and the commissioners, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. Items to be included on the agenda by commissioners shall be submitted to the county clerk at least three business days prior to the regular meeting. An agenda work session may be held to finalize the agenda. The chairperson and all commissioners may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the board is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting shall be met. The agenda shall be made available to the commissioners at least one business day before every board meeting. 
(1) Requests for agenda items. Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for a meeting. To be considered, this request shall be submitted in writing to the county manager and received at least three business days before the agenda work session. 
(2) Changing the agenda. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the quorum. A new item, other than a zoning decision, may be added to the agenda by a majority vote of the quorum only if it becomes necessary to address the item during the meeting. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-190)) 
Sec. 2-224. - Consent agenda. 
A consent agenda may be prepared by the county manager for the board to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval without debate may be placed on a consent agenda. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the chairperson shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chairperson shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the chairperson may ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda shall be approved by a majority vote of the board. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-191)) 
Sec. 2-225. - Decorum. 
All parliamentary rules and procedures may be relaxed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners at the beginning of any meeting of the board. All commissioners shall conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks shall be directed to the chairperson and not to individual commissioners, staff, or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate and may be ruled out of order. A commissioner may not speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairperson. All comments made by a commissioner shall address the motion that is being discussed. The chairperson shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a commissioner believes that a rule has been broken, he may raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairperson may rule on the question or may allow the board to debate the issue and decide by majority vote. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-192)) 
Sec. 2-226. - Voting. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of commissioners present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean at least one-half of the commissioners present plus one commissioner, excluding abstentions. When a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the commissioners present excluding abstentions. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-193)) 
Sec. 2-227. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest preventing him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. At the discretion of the chairperson, the abstaining commissioner may be asked to leave the room during the discussion and vote of the matter for which he has abstained. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-194)) 
Sec. 2-228. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1) Public comments. The agenda of the meeting shall include time for comments from the public. All members of the public wishing to address the board shall submit their name and the topic of their comments to the county manager before the agenda work session. Individuals may be allotted five minutes to make their comments and those comments shall be limited to their chosen topic. These limits may be waived by the chairperson or a majority vote of the quorum. 
(2) Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote of the quorum, the board may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the board. These comments shall be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may speak only once. These limits may be waived by the chairperson or a majority vote of the quorum. Anyone wishing to speak at any board meeting must be recognized by the chairperson before addressing the board. 
(3) Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a board meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for commissioners. Individuals violating any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chairperson or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of the quorum shall rule on the chairperson's decree or point of order. An individual violating the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairperson. 
(4) Public hearings. The board of commissioners may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the board. Hearings may be held immediately prior to, during or following a meeting of the board or at such other places and times as the board may determine. Hearings require at least ten minutes per side. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. Hearings on zoning decisions shall be governed in accordance with the zoning policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-195)) 
Sec. 2-229. - Minutes. 
The board of commissioners shall approve the minutes before they may be considered as an official record of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected, if necessary, and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts regarding the content of the minutes shall be decided by a majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chairperson and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-197)) 
Sec. 2-231. - Matters not specifically addressed. 
When issues arise on which this article is silent, Roberts Rules of Order (Revised 10th Edition) may be consulted for authority on the issues. 
(Ord. of 5-29-2009, § 1(2-199)) 
Chapters 3—5 - RESERVED 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Purposes. 
(a) The board of commissioners are desirous of reasonably controlling the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b) The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is being enacted in accordance with the plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values, and to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(c) Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the unincorporated area of the county will be issued subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 6-1; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage includes all alcohol, whiskey, liquor, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Liquor or distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Malt beverage or beer means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage or beer" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Off-premises consumption means the sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages for consumption in a location other than the licensed premises. 
On-premises consumption means the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in broken packages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
Package means a bottle, can or other original consumer container. 
Premises means one physical identifiable place of business consisting of one room, or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name where beer and wine by the drink are sold. On-premises outlets which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishments having the same trade name, ownership, or management; provided nothing herein shall require additional licenses for service bars, or portable bars used exclusively for the purpose of preparing such drinks when such bars are accessible only to employees of the licensed establishment and from which drinks are prepared to be served in the licensed premises. The term "premises" shall not include common facilities located in a shopping center area. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not including cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Code 2000, § 6-2; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-3. - Sale a privilege, not a right. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as giving a person a right to sell alcoholic beverages, but the manufacture, sale, and distribution of alcoholic beverages is declared to be a privilege in the state and in the county. 
(Code 2000, § 6-3; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-4. - Unlawful activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or any other entity, unless specifically exempt under this chapter, to engage in any of the following activities: 
(1) To serve or offer for drinking or have possession for sale or distribution, any type of alcoholic beverage in any park, playground or building within the unincorporated area of the county without a license and business tax certificate. 
(2) To sell or offer for sale, or serve for remuneration whether the payment is direct or indirect, any alcoholic beverage at retail or wholesale without a license and business tax certificate. 
(3) To engage in any act involving the sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited by the laws of the state. 
(4) To violate any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Code 2000, § 6-4; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-5. - Right of county officials to enter premises for enforcement purposes. 
Agents and inspectors appointed by the board of county commissioners for the enforcement of this chapter, including officers of the county sheriff's department, are empowered and authorized to enter upon the premises of any person or entity engaged in the manufacture, sale, distribution, storage, or transportation of alcoholic beverages and liquors at any time for the purpose of inspecting said premises and shall have access during such inspection to all books, records, and supplies relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution, storage, and transportation of alcoholic beverages and liquors. 
(Code 2000, § 6-5; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-6. - Notice to county of disciplinary action against licensee. 
(a) The term "disciplinary action," as used herein, means any action taken by any municipal, county, state, or federal agency against the licensee, his employees, or his place of business, including, but not limited to: 
(1) Arrest by local, state, or federal authorities of the licensee or of any of his employees.
(2) Citations issued by local, state, or federal authorities, to the licensee or any of his employees. 
(3) Indictments, presentments, or accusations in any local, state, or federal courts against the licensee or any of his employees. 
(4) Conviction of, or penalties imposed pursuant to a plea of nolo contendere or non vult against, the licensee or any of his employees in any local, state, or federal court. 
(5) Penalties imposed by any regulatory agency against the licensee or any of his employees.
(6) Any other written charges or reprimands by local, state, or federal authorities.
(b) Any licensee who has any disciplinary action taken against him or his employees by any authority, either municipal, county, state or federal, shall notify the board of county commissioners in writing within 48 hours of such action, and of the disposition of any charges or the time and place where such charges will be heard. Any licensee who fails to so notify the commission within the prescribed time may be cited before the commission to show cause why his license shall not be suspended or revoked. Notice shall be sent to the commission, c/o Clerk, Ben Hill County Commissioners, 402A East Pine Street, Fitzgerald, Georgia 31750. 
(Code 2000, § 6-6; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-7. - Days sales allowed. 
Licensees under this chapter shall not permit the sale of any alcoholic beverage on Sunday. Furthermore, no liquor store may be open on Christmas Day. 
(Code 2000, § 6-7; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-8. - Reading of regulations required. 
No person shall be approved for a license under this chapter, or approved for employment by a licensee, unless such person shall have read this chapter in full text, and shall certify in writing the fact of such reading and the knowledge thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 6-8; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-9. - Copy of regulations to be maintained on premises; employees to be instructed. 
It shall be the duty of the management of the premises licensed under this chapter to maintain a copy of this chapter, or the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and all amendments thereto, on such premises, and to instruct each and every employee on the terms thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 6-9; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-10. - Hours of sale. 
Any and all holders of licenses under the authority of this chapter shall observe the following schedule of hours of operation, which shall be determined by Eastern Standard Time or daylight saving time, whichever is in effect: 
(1) Holders of Class A and C licenses for on-premises consumption of beer and wine shall not open for business earlier than 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and may serve any authorized alcoholic beverage until 12:00 midnight, provided, further, that said premises shall be vacated of all persons, including employees, by no later than 2:00 a.m. Where the sale of alcoholic beverages is in conjunction with the sale of food, the aforesaid hours of sale shall be applicable only to the sale of alcoholic beverages and not applicable to the sale of food; provided, however, no alcoholic beverage shall be allowed to remain on any bars, tables, or be in possession of patrons after 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and the inventory of alcoholic beverages must be secured as described in section 6-11. 
(2) Holders of a Class E license for off-premises consumption of liquor shall not open for business earlier than 8:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and may remain open for business until 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. 
(3) Holders of Class B and D licenses for off-premises consumption of beer and wine who are not licensed to sell liquor shall be prohibited from selling beer and or wine only between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on the Monday next following. 
(4) No licensee, employee of such licensee, or any person acting on behalf of such licensee shall furnish, or give beverage alcohol to a person on any day or at any time when the sale of same is prohibited by law. 
(Code 2000, § 6-11; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-11. - Inventory to be kept under lock and key when sale prohibited. 
(a) On all days and times that the sale of alcoholic beverages or a particular type of alcoholic beverage is prohibited by state law and where the business is otherwise open and operating for the purpose of the sale of other items, it is required that all coolers designated as alcoholic beverage coolers be kept under lock and key during the period of time that sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited and also that any inventory of alcoholic beverages must be kept under lock and key during these periods. 
(b) If a Class B off-premises consumption of beer or Class D off-premises consumption of wine license is issued in connection with the operation of a grocery store, the beer and/or wine at said location shall be separated from the stock of groceries and shall be locked up or covered up during any hours of the day when the sale of said beverages is prohibited by law. 
(Code 2000, § 6-13; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-12. - Furnishing to minors prohibited. 
(a) Except as otherwise authorized by law:
(1) No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2) No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3) No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; and 
(4) No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for, or on behalf of, a person under 21 years of age. 
(b) The prohibitions contained in subsections (a) (1), (2) and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1) For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
(2) At a religious ceremony; or
(3) In the home of the parent or guardian, with the parent or guardian present.
(c) The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of an alcoholic beverage by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and including, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-104. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate nor a traffic citation. 
(d) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1) Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2) Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; 
(3) Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(e) Each retail business establishment in the county which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind shall post in a conspicuous place a notice which shall contain the provisions of the laws of the state which deal with the unlawful sale of such items to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(f) No person who holds a license or is responsible for the day-to-day operation of an establishment holding a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall allow any individual under the age of 21 years to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises unless such individual is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian except as provided herein. This prohibition shall apply regardless of whether or not said establishment on said date or time is operating for the purpose of the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, and regardless of what other type of license or business tax certificate said establishment may have. This section shall not prohibit individuals under the age of 21 years from being in a qualified eating establishment or attending a special event for which a license for a single event is issued pursuant to this chapter, and does not apply to such individuals who are employees of the licensee with assigned duties in the licensed premises. 
(g) Any licensee hereunder, or any person in the employ of the licensee or any person in the employ of the retail business establishment for which the license was granted, who violates the provisions of section 6-11, shall subject the license of the licensee to suspension or revocation, and shall be guilty of an offense and, upon trial and conviction of a misdemeanor, shall be punished as covered by the penalty listed in section 1-11 
(Code 2000, § 6-15; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-13. - Premises to be kept in orderly manner, with outside gatherings of patrons restricted. 
(a) Owners and/or applicant managers and employees shall be responsible for keeping an orderly place, and no patron shall cause a disturbance of any kind, nor shall any patron be allowed to stand, sit, mingle or assemble outside the building, in parking lots or autos, and drink alcoholic beverages except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b) Businesses with on-premises alcoholic beverage consumption licenses may serve alcoholic beverages only within the definite closed locality, whether room, shop or building, where alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink. However, any business with such license, which has an outside patio area that is actually and permanently attached to the main building, may serve alcoholic beverages in the patio area; provided, however, a bar may not be set up in such an outside patio area, nor are portable bars, beer tents or other such facilities for the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted. Sales through doorways or windows to sidewalks, parking lots, or patio areas are also prohibited. 
(Code 2000, § 6-16; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-14. - Sanitation requirements. 
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or for the storage thereof for sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be in full compliance with the regulations of the department of public health regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. All premises for which a Class A on-premises consumption of beer or Class C on-premises consumption of wine license has been issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities. 
(Code 2000, § 6-17; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-15. - Licensee purchases from licensed wholesaler. 
No retail dealer or retail consumption dealer shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way effect the transfer of any beverage alcohol to him or for his account except from a licensed wholesaler. No arrangement whereby a wholesaler shall handle, clear or in any other way arrange to transfer for any licensed wholesalers to licensed retail dealers or retail consumption dealer shall be permitted. The making of any forbidden arrangements shall be cause for revocation of the licenses of all licensed wholesalers and retail dealers or retail consumption dealers involved. 
(Code 2000, § 6-19; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-16. - Violations; unlawful activities. 
(a) Any person holding any license issued pursuant to this chapter or any employee or agent of such person who violates any provision of this chapter, or directs, consents to, permits, or acquiesces in such violation, either directly or indirectly shall, by such conduct, subject the license to suspension or revocation. For purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, any act committed by an employee, agent or representative of a licensee shall be deemed to be an act of such licensee. 
(b) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to permit any person to engage in any activity on the premises for which the license is issued or within the place of business, which is in violation of the laws or regulations of any federal, state, county or municipal governing authority or regulatory agency. With respect to any such activity, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the same was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(Code 2000, § 6-20; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Secs. 6-17—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-36. - License required. 
(a) No alcoholic beverage may be sold, possessed for sale or distributed in the unincorporated area of the county except under a license granted by the county board of commissioners. 
(b) Licenses granted hereunder shall fall into one or more of the following classes:
(1) Class A: On-premises consumption of beer.
(2) Class B: Off-premises consumption of beer.
(3) Class C: On-premises consumption of wine.
(4) Class D: Off-premises consumption of wine.
(5) Class E: Off-premises consumption of liquor.
(Code 2000, § 6-31; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-37. - Filing application. 
(a) Form; information to be provided. 
(1) A written application to the board of county commissioners for a license under this chapter shall be made on forms approved by board of county commissioners. All questions and information required by the application form should be filled in and subscribed to by all applicants, under oath, and shall disclose among other information whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or a violation of any municipal ordinance (except minor traffic violations) in any state, county, municipal or federal court, and the particulars of same; whether applicant has any existing liquor, beer or wine business in the state; whether the interest of applicant is total, partial, or exact extent of same, and, if partial, the names and addresses of all others having a partial interest in said business and the extent of such interest; and such other and further information as the as the commission shall deem necessary. 
(2) It is further required that all applicants for licenses allowing the sale of liquor shall submit with their applications personnel statements. These personnel statements shall be furnished to the board of county commissioners upon request and will be required for both applications for original licenses and renewals of existing licenses. 
(3) Every license application shall be accompanied by a plat prepared by a registered surveyor, showing the distance of the premises for which the license is being applied from the nearest church, school, library or public recreation area, or from any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by a government entity, as measured under section 6-42. The license application shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease. If the license applicant leases the property and improvements, a copy of the lease shall be maintained on a current basis in the license file. If the license applicant is the owner of the real estate and improvements where the business will be located, a copy of the deed shall accompany the application and be maintained as a part of the license file. 
(4) The application shall also include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the agent for service of process, who must be a resident of the county, and the name of the manager. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the board of county commissioners with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(b) Date due. All applications, including required documentation, shall be filed with the board of county commissioners not less than 30 days prior to the date when the application is scheduled to be heard. 
(c) Fee. Every such application, excluding renewals and transfers, must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in an amount to be set by ordinance from time to time and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk, said fee to be paid by certified check, cashier's check or money order made payable to the board of county commissioners, as applicable. 
(d) Untrue or misleading information; material omissions. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of, an original, renewal or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial of the license; and if any license has been granted under such circumstances, the license shall be subject to revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 6-32; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-38. - Inspection of application by county manager and investigation by sheriff; provision of information to county manager upon request. 
(a) If so filed as to comply with the requirements of this chapter, an application under this chapter shall be sworn to and directed to the county manager, who shall inspect the application and refer same to the county sheriff, who shall investigate the character and reputation of the applicant, owners, partners, officers of the corporation, shareholders, managers, employees, and other associated with the application, and the suitability of the location for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b) All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the county manager and/or the county sheriff's department, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person involved in any transaction pertinent to the application or any evidence relevant to the application as may be requested by the county manager or the county sheriff's department. Failure to produce such evidence or person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of the application. 
(Code 2000, § 6-33; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-39. - Review of application by the board of county commissioners. 
(a) Procedures generally. All applications for original alcoholic beverage licenses of any type shall be submitted to the board of county commissioners, which shall review the applications in such manner as the commission may determine to be necessary. After the review is complete, the board of county commissioners shall cause to be issued such license as it may determine to be warranted and needed by the applicant. An application must be approved by a majority of the board of county commissioners before a license will be issued to an applicant. If an application is denied by the commission, an applicant may request a hearing up to 60 days after the denial of the application. Such hearing shall be heard in the superior court of the county. 
(b) Order of consideration. All applications presented shall be noted as to the date and exact time of filing, and such applications shall be presented, heard and considered by the commission in the order of their filing. 
(Code 2000, § 6-34; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-40. - Criteria for license approval; personal qualifications of applicants. 
A license will be issued only to a person who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. An applicant who is not a resident of the county may be issued a license only upon designating a resident of the county, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. Where an applicant is other than a natural person, it must be an entity organized and existing under the laws of the United States or one of its states, and an agent of the entity must meet the qualifications of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 6-35; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-41. - Individuals not eligible for license. 
(a) The following individuals are not eligible for an alcoholic beverage license, even if they possess all of the qualifications listed in section 6-40 
(1) A person or any of the officers and directors who have been convicted of a felony in any jurisdiction. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere. 
(2) A person or any of the officers and directors who have been convicted of a nonfelonious crime of moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession and sale of narcotics or liquors within the five years preceding the filing of the application. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or a plea of nolo contendere. 
(3) A person whose license to sell alcoholic beverages has been revoked for cause in any state or territory of the United States within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(4) A person who has knowingly falsified information or made any material misrepresentation on the application for a license under this chapter or any application under the predecessor ordinance for the county submitted within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(5) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal, state or local law pertaining to the possession, manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. For purposes of this subsection, a conviction includes a guilty plea or a plea of nolo contendere. 
(b) Should any such applicant, partner or officer or director of any applicant entity, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, or to the violation of any laws of the state regulating possession or the sale of narcotics, drugs, liquors, wine or beer or the lottery laws of the state, said license shall be subject after hearing to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 6-36; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-42. - Location restrictions. 
(a) Zoning. No license shall be issued for the sale, either at wholesale or retail, of alcoholic beverages unless the licensee's place of business is located in an area within the county that is properly zoned for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b) Proximity to churches, libraries, schools, and public recreation areas. No original license shall be issued hereunder where the place of business of the licensee is located within the following distances of the following establishments: 
(1) Church, library buildings, or public recreation areas:
a. Distilled spirits, 100 yards.
b. Malt beverage, 100 yards.
c. Wine, 100 yards.
(2) School building or school grounds:
a. Distilled spirits, 200 yards.
b. Malt beverage, 100 yards.
c. Wine, 100 yards.
The schools or colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges in the state which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b) and shall not include private schools or colleges within which only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(c) No license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued for a new location unless such proposed location is at a greater distance than 300 feet from any alcohol treatment center owned and operated by a governmental entity. 
(d) No Class A or Class C license will be issued where the proposed location is more than two miles from the nearest city limits of the City of Fitzgerald. 
(e) All measurements to determine distances for the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1) From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2) In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway;
(3) Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route;
(4) To the front door of the building, or to the grounds, whichever is applicable.
(f) No license in effect on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be revoked before its day of expiration by reason of the method of measurement set out in this section if the license was granted in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(g) Further, the board of county commissioners may, in its discretion, issue or deny any license when there is evidence that the type and number of schools, churches, libraries or public recreation areas in the vicinity of the place of business of the licensee causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided herein. 
(h) No license shall be issued under this chapter to any premises which does not meet the requirements of all state, county, and city laws, ordinances and regulations which would apply to said premises, including, but not limited to, building, fire, and sanitation codes. 
(i) The restrictions on locations as stated herein are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any restrictions imposed by the laws of the state. 
(j) If an application is either withdrawn from consideration or denied, no application may be made by any person for the location for which the withdrawn or denied application was made for a period of 12 months. 
(k) If a license is suspended, no application may be made by any person for the location for which the suspended license was held, until such time as the period of suspension for said license expires. 
(l) If a license is revoked, no application may be made by a person for the location for which the revoked license was held for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 6-37; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-43. - Additional restrictions. 
(a) In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, renewed, transferred or issued to a new location, in addition to all the provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1) Reputation, character. The applicant's reputation, character, trade and business association or past business ventures, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2) Previous violations of liquor laws. If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3) Manner of conducting prior liquor business. If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic liquors, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder, especially as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4) Location. The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(5) Number of licenses in trading area. The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(6) Dancing. If dancing is to be permitted upon the premises for which the license is sought and the applicant has previously permitted dancing upon any premises controlled or supervised by him, the manner in which he controlled or supervised such dancing to prevent any violation of any law, regulation or ordinance. 
(7) Previous revocation of license. If the applicant is a person whose license issued under the police powers of any governing authority has been previously suspended or revoked or who has previously had an alcoholic beverages license suspended or revoked. 
(8) Payment of taxes. If the applicant and business are not delinquent in the payment of any local taxes. 
(9) Congregation of minors. Any circumstances which may cause minors to congregate in the vicinity of the proposed location, even if the location meets the distance requirement under section 6-42 
(10) Prior incidents. Evidence that a substantial number of incidents requiring intervention by the county sheriff's office have occurred within the immediate area of the proposed location in the unincorporated area of the county during the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application. 
(11) Previous denial or revocation. The denial of an application, or the revocation of a license, occurring within the preceding 12 months, which was based on the qualifications of the proposed location. 
(b) If the application is denied, the board of county commissioners shall cause a written report to be prepared showing the reason for the denial. The commission shall return the application showing its denial, together with the written report, to the county manager who shall notify the applicant of the denial within five days of the denial. Notice to the applicant shall be made in writing, showing the reason for the denial and the day and time of the next scheduled meeting of the commission. 
(Code 2000, § 6-38; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-44. - Time limit for acquiring licenses once approved. 
All licenses must be obtained not later than 90 days from the date of the approval of the application, and, if not so obtained, the license shall be void. Extensions of time under this section shall be granted only by the board of county commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 6-139; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-45. - License fee. 
(a) When due and payable. When a license has been approved and granted, the same shall be paid for by certified check, cashier's check or money order for the full amount of the license fee. 
(b) Amount. Each applicant shall pay a license fee in an amount set by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c) Proration. The full license fee must be paid for a license issued prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of the full license fee shall be paid for a license issued after July 1 of the license year. 
(d) Refund. In case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of the calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Code 2000, § 6-40; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-46. - Term of license. 
All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year. 
(Code 2000, § 6-41; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-47. - Presumption of ownership. 
The alcoholic beverage kept, stored or found at the license holder's licensed place of business or at his warehouse shall be presumed to be his property. 
(Code 2000, § 6-42; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-48. - Licenses not transferable; exceptions; fee; new ownership. 
(a) Generally. Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more partners of a partnership holding a license from withdrawing from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(b) Exceptions. 
(1) Estate administration, etc. In case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, the same may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if otherwise qualified. 
(2) Change of location. Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no additional license fee, and the new location shall not be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(3) Addition of partners or stockholders. A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business, or for building a new facility, and where it appears that the licensee himself receives directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new stockholder must be approved by the county manager and the county sheriff's department. 
(4) Procedure for application for exception. Any licensee desiring a transfer of a license pursuant to an exception hereunder shall notify the county manager of the basis of the exception and shall provide the county manager with any information and/or documentation requested in connection with the exception. The county manager shall then either approve or deny the exception. If the exception is approved, the license shall be transferred by the county manager. 
(c) Fee for transfers. There shall be a fee of an amount set by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk for transfers pursuant to this section. 
(d) New ownership; retail alcoholic beverage licenses. No retail beer, wine or distilled spirits license shall be transferred, but where a change in ownership is contemplated, the new owner shall file a new application for a license. Changes in license ownership from one party at interest named in the original application to another party at interest as named in the original application, and changes of license from one employer or manager of any social club to a successor employer or manager of the same club, shall not be deemed a transfer of license within the prohibition against transfer contained in these regulations. In each instance the board of county commissioners shall be advised in writing of such change and a complete disclosure of all facts in connection therewith shall be made at the time such request for change is presented. An applicant for a change of license must follow the procedure for applying for an alcoholic beverage license. A transfer fee from manager to manager shall be in an amount set forth by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 6-43; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-49. - Renewal of licenses. 
(a) All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application therefor, together with the requisite fee with the county manager for such renewal, upon forms approved by the county manager, on or before December 1 of each year. 
(b) All licenses to be renewed for the subsequent calendar year shall be submitted by the county manager to the commission for approval no later than December 15 of each year. Any licenses that have been placed on probation, suspension or have been revoked by the commission during the year shall be submitted on a separate list by the county manager for review and consideration for approval. 
(Code 2000, § 6-44; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-50. - Denial of application to renew license. 
(a) The possession of a license under this chapter is a privilege granted by the county board of commissioners. The board of county commissioners is hereby authorized to deny the renewal of a license if it finds to exist any of the grounds constituting due cause to revoke, suspend or place on probation a license, as stated in section 6-52 
(b) When the sheriff recommends that an application to renew a license be denied, he shall provide the county manager with a written report describing the reason for the recommendation. The county manager shall notify the commission and shall serve written notice on the licensee at least five days before the next scheduled meeting of the commission. The notice shall state the reason given by the sheriff for his recommendation to deny the renewal of the license and the time and place of the next scheduled meeting of commission. 
(c) The commission shall receive evidence in the same manner described in section 6-53 
(d) At the conclusion of the evidence, the commission shall consider the evidence and shall decide to grant or to deny the renewal of the license. 
(e) If the application is denied, the commission shall cause a written report to be prepared showing the reason or reasons for the denial. The commission shall return the application showing its denial, together with the written report to the county manager who shall notify the applicant of the denial within five days of the denial. Notice to the applicant shall be made in writing, showing the reason for the denial and the day and time of the next scheduled meeting of the commission. The applicant may appeal the denial of the application, by serving notice on the commission requesting reconsideration of the application. 
(Code 2000, § 6-45; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-51. - Cancellation of licenses. 
(a) A license issued under this chapter expires on December 31 of the year in which issued, unless it expires or is revoked earlier pursuant to this section and section 6-52 
(b) A license issued under this chapter expires upon the individual licensee ceasing to act as licensee for any reason unless an extension is granted pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(c) Failure to open for business. All applicants for licenses hereunder must, within 180 days after the approval of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the application and license and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sales as referred to above within the 180-day period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. Any extension of time under this section shall be granted only by the board of county commissioners. 
(d) Ceasing of operations. Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operating of the business and sale of the product and products as authorized in the license, but who shall thereafter cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license for a period of at least nine months, shall automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action. Any extension of time under this section shall be granted only by the commission. 
(Code 2000, § 6-46; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-52. - Probation, suspension and revocation. 
Any license issued under this chapter may be put on probation, suspended and/or revoked by the board of county commissioners after a finding of due cause. Due cause for the probation, suspension or revocation of a license shall include but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) A violation of this chapter or any state or federal law governing the manufacture, transport, or sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensee or any person in his employ or in the employ of the establishment for which the license was issued. 
(2) The conviction of the licensee of a crime which would render him ineligible to apply for a license. The term "conviction," as used herein, includes a plea of guilty or nolo contendere. 
(3) Failure by the licensee, or any person in his employ or in the employ of the establishment for which the license was issued, to adequately supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, patrons and others on the licensed premises, or on any property owned or leased by the licensee, including, but not limited to, parking lots and parking areas, or on any parking lots or areas which may be lawfully used by patrons of a licensed establishment, in order to protect the safety and well-being of the general public and of those using the premises. 
(4) The revocation of the license or permit of a business to operate by any state, county, city or other governmental authority due to a violation of any law applicable to the business including, but not limited to, building codes and health codes. 
(5) Falsifying information or making any material misrepresentation on the application for a license under this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 6-47; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-53. - Procedure for denial, probation, suspension and revocation. 
(a) Upon cause to believe that due cause exists for the denial of license issuance, or the probation, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter, the county manager or head of any department authorized to inspect the licensed premises including the sheriff, shall file a complaint with the board of county commissioners. The county manager shall notify the licensee, in writing, of the time and place of the next meeting when such complaint shall be heard by the commission. Such notice shall be deemed sufficient when mailed to licensee at the address of the location at least five days prior to said hearing. 
(b) The commission shall hear the evidence offered by the complaining authority herein and the evidence offered by the licensee. The licensee may be represented by counsel, may offer testimony by witnesses or any other evidence and may question the witnesses of the complaining authority. At the close of the evidence, the commission shall revoke, suspend or sustain the license, or place the licensee on probation. 
(c) If the commission decides to deny issuance of a license, or revoke or suspend the license, all licenses issued to the location shall be surrendered to the county manager and no alcohol shall be sold, served or consumed on the premises. 
(d) If the commission decides to suspend the license, it shall state the number of days of the suspension. The licensee shall surrender the license to the county manager who shall return the license to the licensee at the end of the suspension period. No alcohol shall be sold, served or consumed at the location during the period of suspension. 
(e) If the commission sustains the license, the license shall remain in effect as issued.
(f) If the commission decides to place the licensee on probation, it shall state the number of days of the probation. The licensee shall retain the license during the probation period. 
(g) The decision of the commission may be appealed by either the licensee or the complaining authority by serving notice in writing on the clerk of the board of commissioners within five days on the date of the hearing before the commission. The filing of a notice of appeal shall have no effect on the status of the license as decided by the commission and if the license was placed on probation, suspended or revoked, it shall remain so until said status is changed by the commission. 
(h) If a notice of appeal is filed with the county clerk he shall notify the appellant of the next scheduled meeting of the commission, at least five days before the date of the meeting; provided, however, that the five-day period may be waived by agreement of both parties. 
(i) At the appeal hearing, the commission shall hear the evidence offered by the complaining authority and the evidence offered by the licensee. The licensee may be represented by counsel, may offer testimony by witnesses or any other evidence and may question the witnesses of the complaining authority. At the close of the evidence, the commission shall affirm or reverse its prior decision. 
(j) If the commission decides to affirm its revocation of the license, all licenses issued to the location, if not already surrendered, shall be surrendered to the county manager and no alcohol shall be sold, served or consumed on the premises. 
(k) If the commission decides to affirm its suspension of the license, it shall state the number of days of the suspension. The licensee shall surrender the license or licenses, if not already surrendered, to the county manager shall return the license to the licensee at the end of the suspension period. No alcohol shall be sold, served or consumed at the location during the period of suspension. 
(l) If the commission reverses its prior action with regard to the license and the county manager has possession of the license or licenses, the license shall be promptly returned to the licensee. 
(m) If the commission or committee thereof decides to affirm its decision to place the licensee on probation, it shall state the number of days of the probation. The licensee shall retain the license during the period of the probation period. 
(Code 2000, § 6-48; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-54. - Distance between locations of licensees. 
(a) No retail dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be issued to any applicant whose proposed location is one and 500 yards or less from an existing location or establishment for which the county board of commissioners has issued a retail dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits. 
(b) The distance provided for herein shall be measured in the same manner as provided in section 6-42 
(c) The distance requirements provided for herein shall not be construed or interpreted as prohibiting an applicant, who is otherwise qualified, from being approved and granted a license which constitutes a transfer in ownership of an existing license for distilled spirits which was previously held by an owner or operator of an existing establishment. 
(Code 2000, § 6-49; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 05-001, § 1, 1-4-2005) 
Secs. 6-55—6-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 6-82. - Levy; schedule. 
(a) Malt beverages. There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the unincorporated area of the county a specific excise tax in an amount set forth by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(b) Distilled spirits and wine. There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling distilled spirits and wine within the unincorporated area of the county a specific excise tax in the amount set forth by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 6-61; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-83. - In addition to other license fees, etc. 
The excise tax provided for in this article shall be in addition to any license fee, tax or charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages, distilled spirits or wine at retail or wholesale, within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 6-62; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 6-84. - Payment. 
(a) The excise tax shall be paid as follows: Wholesale dealers of distilled spirits and wine shall file a report, showing, for the preceding calendar month, the exact quantities of beverages by size and container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory of the month, sold within the unincorporated area of the county by the 20th day of each month. 
(b) Each such wholesale dealer shall also remit to the county clerk on the tenth day of each month succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due by check payable to the board of county commissioners, in accordance with this section, with no discount by state law. All books and records required of each such wholesale dealer by this section and by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81 shall be subject to inspection and audit by the board of county commissioners to verify compliance with this section. 
(Code 2000, § 6-63; Ord. No. 02-001, 3-5-2002) 
Secs. 6-85—6-111. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK (LIQUOR BY THE DRINK) 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-112. - Purposes. 
(a) The purposes of this article shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1) Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law;
(2) Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons;
(3) Ensuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant, private club or nightclub; 
(4) The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions;
(5) Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this article be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the county, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-64), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-113. - Definitions. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
Artificial person includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, club or institution. 
County means Ben Hill County, Georgia, and when used in a geographical sense means the unincorporated areas of the county. 
County manager means the county manager for Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
County clerk means the clerk for Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Board of commissioners ( or commission or board) means the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Chairperson means the chairperson of the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center, only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, sidewalk tables, patios and other similar rooms shall constitute the licensed premises. 
Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of an artificial person includes both the artificial person and the named licensee. 
Majority member means the member, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the membership interest in a limited liability company; if no member owns more than 50 percent of the membership interest in a limited liability company, the majority member is the member owning a greater membership interest than any other member; and if two or more members each own the same membership percentage interest in a limited liability company and each own a membership interest that is greater than the membership interest of any other member, then any one of such members may act as the majority member. 
Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting of a corporation, the majority stockholder is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then any one of such persons may act as the majority stockholder. 
Mixed drink or liquor by the drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
Named licensee means the person acting as such for an artificial person pursuant to section 6-145. 
Nightclub means any licensee other than a private club or a restaurant. 
Person includes an individual and an artificial person. 
Semipublic parking facility means any privately owned area wherein motor vehicles may be parked by the public in conjunction with any business, enterprise, commercial establishment, office building, church, school, or multiple-family residential building. 
(b) Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this article shall have the same meaning as when used in comparable provision of title 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-65), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-114. - Violations; penalty. 
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction in the magistrate court of the county, be punished as provided in section 1-11, which may include a fine or imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this article. 
(b) The violation of any of the provisions of this article, including the maximum occupant load, shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(c) For the first violation there shall be a $1,000.00 fine.
(d) For the second violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a 30-day suspension of the license privileges. 
(e) For the third, and any subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a 90-day suspension of license privileges. 
(f) For any violation beyond the third, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, the license may be revoked at the discretion of the board of county commissioners. 
(g) Any suspension, or revocation of a license, shall first require notice to the license holder of a due process hearing before the board of county commissioners, as required by section 6-152 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-66), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-115. - County manager's duties. 
(a) The county manager, or the county manager's designee, is hereby vested with the following duties and powers: 
(1) To take all applications, to screen, verify, investigate and review all initial applications for licenses for the sale of liquor by the drink. 
(2) To recommend to the board of commissioners modifications to the ordinances and policies of the county pertaining to the regulation, control and taxing of liquor by the drink. 
(3) To hear complaints, suggestions and recommendations from the sheriff's office, state officials, alcoholic beverage providers, and the public at large as to the operation of liquor by the drink outlets within the county. 
(b) After screening, investigating and complying with all parts of this article, the county manager or the county manager's designee, with the approval of the board of commissioners, shall grant the applicant's desired license or shall deny said license, applying all requirements of this article. 
(c) An applicant, or any county or state official objecting to the request of the applicant, who is dissatisfied with the decision, may appeal the aggrieved action to the board of commissioners, whose decision on the appeal shall be final. Any appeal from the decision must be filed within 30 days, and the chairperson will schedule the appeal for a hearing within 30 days. 
(d) All renewal decisions shall be made by the county manager or the county manager's designee employing the rules and regulations of this article. 
(e) No person who is delinquent or past due on any monetary obligations owed to the county, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, business licenses, utility bills, sanitation fees, or any other taxes, fees or monetary obligations, shall be eligible for a permit under this section. 
(f) Considerations and guidelines for granting or denying license. The board of commissioners, in making its final determination upon an initial application, may be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to grant such license: 
(1) The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location (i.e., whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business). 
(2) The proximity of churches, hospitals, schools, public parks, community centers, and the like. 
(3) Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities.
(4) Whether the proposed location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5) The criminal record of the applicant and outlet manager and their general good character and reputation and their financial responsibility; provided that nonpayment of state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence as to lack of financial responsibility. 
(6) Report of the sheriff.
(7) Consideration of information required in the application and whether requirements as to notice and advertisement have been met. 
(8) Such other evidence as may be presented to the board of commissioners.
(9) Whether any previous license issued for the applicant, outlet manager or for the location has been suspended or revoked. 
(10) Whether the applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcohol.
(11) The history or reputation of the proposed location of the outlet for gambling, illegal sex acts, fighting or other acts of violence, and/or other violations of the law. 
(12) Whether the type and number of schools, churches, libraries or public recreation areas in the vicinity of the place of business of the licensee causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided in this article. 
(13) The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character or neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(14) The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the proposed location. 
(15) Any circumstances which may cause minors to congregate in the vicinity of the proposed location, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-67), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-116—6-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 

Sec. 6-144. - Required classifications, etc. 
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any liquor by the drink within the unincorporated area of the county except under a valid license issued under this article and in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b) Pay schedule. License fees shall be payable in advance for an entire year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year. If an initial fee is paid on or before June 30 of the year of application, the license fees shall not be prorated for a part of year. If an initial fee is paid after June 30 but on the year of application, the license fee shall be reduced 50 percent. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. 
(c) Classification fee. Class of license issued under this article, activities permitted and regulated hereunder, and the annual license fee shall be as follows: 
(1) The fee for a liquor by the drink license (for consumption on the premises) shall be in an amount set forth by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(2) The annual license fee is nonrefundable; however, the county manager and/or board of commissioners may consider refund of the annual license fee on a case-by-case basis upon written request. 
(d) Application fees. Each application for a license under this article other than a one-day application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount set forth by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(e) Payment of fees. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. An applicant may pay the annual license fee at the time the application is filed; and in such event the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license applied for is not issued. If the annual license fee is not paid at the time of the application, the annual license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license by the county manager or the county manager's designee, and no later than 14 days after notification of approval. Failure to pay within 14 days shall bear a ten percent penalty on the license fee and a one percent interest rate monthly until paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-85), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-145. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a) A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation or limited liability company having as its business the sale of liquor by the drink shall be issued in the name of the corporation or limited liability company and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation or majority member, manager or principal officer of the limited liability company; and such majority stockholder, majority member, manager, or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation, limited liability company or other artificial person having as its business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink shall be issued in the name of the corporation, limited liability company or artificial person and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation, limited liability company or artificial person primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b) In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein. 
(c) In the case of a corporation having as its business the sale of liquor by the drink, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee. 
(d) In the case of a limited liability company having as its business the sale of liquor by the drink, the majority member, the manager (if any), and each principal officer (if any) of the limited liability company shall join as applicants for the license; and each such managing member, manager or officer must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee. 
(e) In the case of a corporation, limited liability company, or other artificial person having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein; provided, however, that the county manager or the county manager's designee, with the approval of the may and council, may require the fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholders of the corporation, or officers, members and managers of the limited liability company if they deem it necessary in making their investigation. 
(f) In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of any other artificial person, the artificial person shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-86), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-146. - Qualifications. 
(a) A licensee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. 
(b) A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past five years of any felony or misdemeanor, or violation of local government alcohol ordinances within the past two years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, drugs, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The board of commissioners may at its discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for a non-alcoholic offense for purposes of this subsection if the board of commissioners determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(c) A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(d) No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, or nightclub. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-87), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-147. - Application procedures. 
(a) Application for a license for the sale of liquor by the drink in the unincorporated area of the county shall be filed with the county clerk upon forms prescribed by the county clerk and made available at the office of the board of commissioners. The application shall be subscribed by the applicant under oath and fully completed and executed. The county clerk shall deliver the application to the county manager or the county manager's designee. 
(b) There shall be attached to the application a bank money order, certified check or like remittance of the application. No cash or personal checks will be accepted. 
(c) As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation which shall search the files and forward the fingerprints to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation to determine past criminal activity. 
(d) Failure to fully complete and execute an application for a license or to furnish accurately all data, information and records required by the application form as well as failure to accompany the application with the payment of the prescribed fee shall be deemed just cause for denying the application with prejudice. 
(e) Upon proper completion of the application and payment of fees, the county manager or the county manager's designee shall refer the application to the county sheriff. Thereafter, the sheriff shall present his findings and recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(f) As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, all businesses where liquor by the drink is consumed on the premises shall satisfy all requirements of a fire and life safety inspection performed by the fire chief for the City of Fitzgerald (the "fire chief") or other fire official as may be designated by the board of commissioners and building inspector for the county (the "building inspector") or his designee. The prescribed inspection form shall be provided by the fire chief. In addition, all businesses where liquor by the drink is consumed on the premises and the occupancy load is 100 or more, shall provide the county manager or the county manager's designee with a signed fire safety report and certificate of occupancy from the state fire marshal's office. The fire chief may cause to be inspected any building or portion of any building licensed under this article. 
(g) Upon full compliance with the requirements of the fire and life safety inspections, the fire chief (or other designated fire official) shall notify the county manager or the county manager's designee for further processing of the license. 
(h) After its investigation, the county manager or the county manager's designee, with the approval of the board of commissioners, shall grant or deny the license applied for. 
(i) If the application is denied, the application fee shall not be refunded.
(j) No applicant who at the time of application is the holder of a current license from the county for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the premises shall be required to re-submit information previously furnished by the applicant in connection with obtaining such current license. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-88), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-148. - Renewal. 
All liquor by the drink licensees shall be required to apply for renewal of their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the county clerk and must comply with all provisions of this article, with the exception that publication of notice, fingerprinting and background checks, as required shall not be required for renewal of a license unless there has been a change of ownership of the business or other interests therein. On renewal, the applicant shall be administered and take the oath specifically contained on the application form. The county manager or the county manager's designee may within their discretion require fingerprinting and a full background check on any renewal at any time. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-89), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-149. - Transfer. 
(a) Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b) If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the unincorporated area of the county, the licensee will be required to submit a new application and application fee for the new location. 
(c) In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the county manger or county manager's designee, with the approval of the board of commissioners, determines that it would otherwise violate this article. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this article when the time comes to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(d) Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not, without application for an issuance of a new license, introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e) Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of liquor by the drink, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the county manager or the county manager's designee, if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f) In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the board of commissioners determine that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-90), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-150. - Change in business ownership. 
(a) If any licensee withdraws from, sells or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall, within two business days, notify the county manager and surrender the license. 
(b) In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-91), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-151. - Temporary license. 
(a) Temporary licenses shall be issued on a case-by-case basis.
(b) A temporary license may be issued by the county manager or county manager's designee, if, in their judgment, the denial of a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business. The temporary license shall be issued for a fee set by the board of county commissioners by ordinance and published in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c) A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the board of commissioners at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-92), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-152. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a) A license may be suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners for any violation of this article and/or other county ordinances, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for license. The county manager shall schedule a due process hearing before the board of commissioners for any license holder alleged to have violated any provision of this article by sending, at least 14 days prior to the date of the due process hearing, a certified letter to the license holder containing the date, time, and location of the hearing, the date and nature of the allegations, and the license holder's right to be represented by an attorney and to present evidence. In lieu of a certified letter, the county manager may elect to have service perfected by personal service by a deputy of the sheriff's office. 
(b) The board of commissioners is authorized to suspend the sale of liquor by the drink under any license for any emergency situation such that the board of commissioners finds that such suspension necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and may remain in force until the board of commissioners determine that the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the board of commissioners, at which time the suspension shall cease unless it is extended by the board of commissioners. 
(c) A licensee, or any citizen of the county, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of commissioners, may appeal to the superior court of the county. Any appeal from a decision of the board of commissioners must be filed within 30 days after such decision. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-93), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-153. - Automatic revocation. 
A license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1) The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked, suspended, canceled or not renewed. 
(2) Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the county within 14 days after notification that the approval to issue a license has been made by the board of commissioners. 
(3) Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued. 
(4) Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of 30 days unless extended by the board of commissioners for good cause. 
(5) The licensed business fails to properly account for, file report and pay any excise tax levied and due under this article. 
(6) The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report or maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this article. 
(7) Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the county within the time prescribed. 
(8) The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-94), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-154—6-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION 

Sec. 6-175. - Sale/service in public places. 
It shall be unlawful to furnish or dispense liquor by the drink in public places, or to be consumed in public places. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-100), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-176. - Proximity restrictions. 
(a) No person may sell or offer to sell:
(1) Liquor sales near churches, schools, etc.
a. Liquor by the drink in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of liquor by the drink was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application, unless the location does not have adequate parking to accommodate the nightclub, restaurant or private club. Adequacy of parking under this subsection shall be determined as required by the county zoning ordinance. 
b. A church building in a business zoning district is defined as a freestanding structure built for and used as a church, and does not apply to commercial or retail space that has been converted to occupancy as a church. 
(2) Liquor by the drink within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect within six months after the final adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b) Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of liquor by the drink by bona fide private clubs, owning their own premises, subject to licensing under state law. 
(c) For the purposes of this article, distances shall be measured by drawing a straight line from the nearest point of the outside wall conditioned (mechanically heated or cooled) space of the applicant's business establishment to the nearest point of either the outside wall enclosing conditional (mechanically heated or cooled) space of a church, school, or educational building, or the real property of a school grounds or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-101), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-177—6-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALES 

Sec. 6-206. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-105), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-207. - Rentals paid restricted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of liquor by the drink by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business's sale of liquor by the drink. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-106), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-208. - Retention of records. 
(a) Each licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcohol and alcoholic beverages purchased and all liquor by the drink sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and non-alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times during normal business hours be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. 
(b) All liquor by the drink licensees shall file with the county clerk the following reports by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day of each month: 
(1) An on-premises consumption report of liquor by the drink.
(2) Certified copies of the licensee's state sales tax reports as filed with the state department of revenue. 
(3) Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the board of commissioners to confirm the accuracy of the reported information. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-108), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-209. - Knowledge of article provisions. 
Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this article and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this article on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages on the relevant provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-109), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-210. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
Furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age of liquor by the drink (or any form of alcohol) shall be controlled by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. Additionally, any alleged violation of this section by a license holder, or its or his employee, shall result in a due process hearing before the board of commissioners being called by the county manager to determine if a license should be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-110), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-211. - Days of sales prohibited. 
(a) The sale of liquor by the drink shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election.
(b) No licensee shall permit the sale of liquor by the drink on Sunday.
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-111), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-212. - Sales to intoxicated persons; gambling; disorderly conduct. 
(a) No licensee shall allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b) No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device to hazard money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c) No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-112), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-213. - Container; storage; illumination. 
(a) Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only as liquor by the drink on the licensed premises. 
(b) A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by an authorized agent of the county. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the county shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(c) The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-113), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-214. - Cleanliness of premises; inspections. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the county. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-114), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-215. - Employees of on-premises consumption liquor by the drink licensees; permit required. 
(a) The following regulations regarding employees shall apply to all establishments holding a license for liquor by the drink on the premises: 
(1) No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been issued a permit indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. However, a seven-day grace period shall be given from the date of employment until the permit is issued. The permit shall be provisional until the sheriff has had the applicant fingerprinted, photographed and cleared by the sheriff's office after a computerized background check. If the applicant's background check reveals a record that would make the employee ineligible to keep a permit, the sheriff shall revoke the permit. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be an alcohol service permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be at least 18 years of age and who sells, serves or dispenses liquor by the drink; or is employed as a manager, host, hostess, doorman or bouncer in such establishment. A permit shall be valid for a two-year period, and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. 
(2) The sheriff or his designee shall investigate all applications for alcohol service permits made pursuant to this section. The sheriff may refuse to issue an alcohol service permit to any proposed employee who: 
a. Has been convicted of a felony within a period of five years immediately prior to the date upon which the application for an alcohol service permit was made. 
b. Has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors within two years immediately preceding the application for an alcohol service permit. Misdemeanors will be defined as violations other than minor traffic violations such as speeding, stop sign, failure to yield, following too closely, etc. The two convictions for misdemeanor violations for which the violator was convicted should have arisen at different times. 
c. Has been convicted within a period of five years immediately preceding the application of any of the following offenses: 
1. Pandering, prostitution or soliciting prostitution;
2. Gambling;
3. Illegal sale of controlled substance or narcotic;
4. Where the record indicates such employee would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare or violate the law. 
d. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for the purposes of this subsection. 
(3) A permit shall be issued provisionally in the first seven days of employment upon a signed application and payment of the application fee having been filed with the chief of police; until a search of the criminal record of the applicant has been completed. The application fee shall be as set by the board of county commissioners by ordinance. Such application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4) The sheriff shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no record of a violation of this article, the sheriff shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the sheriff shall notify by letter the applicant and the employer that this person is not eligible for employment. 
(5) It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell liquor by the drink to file with the sheriff as part of their liquor by the drink license renewal application the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their most recent local addresses and telephone numbers, and social security numbers. An applicant for an initial license shall furnish the same information prior to the date when on-premises consumption sales are authorized to begin. 
(6) All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the sheriff. 
(7) This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of delivery driver, busboy, cook, or dishwasher. 
(8) No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, a clearly legible copy of the current, valid permit of each such employee. The employee must keep the original permit on his person when at work in a licensed establishment, though it need not be publicly displayed. 
(9) In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately notify the sheriff's office. 
(10) All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any deputy of the sheriff's office or a state law enforcement officer with jurisdiction in such matters. 
(11) The sheriff may revoke the permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this article or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. The first such offense shall result in a suspension of the permit for 120 days. Any subsequent offense shall result in revocation of the permit, and the employee being ineligible to reapply for such a permit. 
(12) When any employee permit is revoked, the sheriff shall issue a letter to the permit holder, and a copy to the licensee for whom he works, stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(13) It shall be unlawful for an employee whose permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made, to refuse to return the card, or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(14) A new search may be conducted on any person issued a permit if the sheriff receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the permit, he may revoke the permit. 
(b) Nothing herein shall in any way be construed to limit the liability of the licensee for the conduct of its employees. Any violation of this article by an employee remains a violation of this article by the licensee, who is subject to fines, suspension, or revocation as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-115), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-216. - Drive-through sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage within the unincorporated area of the county by means of drive-through sale. 
(b) For purposes of this section, the term "drive-through sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages by any means that allows the customer to remain in his vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-116), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-217—6-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMPLOYMENT OF UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 6-241. - Brown-bagging prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow customers to bring onto the licensed premises their own alcoholic beverages, which is known as "bring your own bottle" (BYOB) or "brown-bagging." 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-118), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-242. - Nightclubs; persons under 21. 
No person under the age of 21 years shall be allowed to enter or be present in any nightclub. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-119), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-243. - Telephone. 
Every licensee shall obtain and maintain an operational land line telephone in good working order on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-120), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-244—6-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 6-265. - Eligibility restricted—Generally. 
A liquor by the drink license may be granted only to a restaurant, a private club, or a nightclub. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-122), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-266. - Same—Restaurants. 
In order to be eligible for a liquor by the drink license, a restaurant shall: 
(1) Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2) Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and refrigeration as required by the county health department and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3) Have the ability to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4) Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments; 
(5) Have at least 60 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and non-alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(6) Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 25 persons; 
(7) The occupancy load for purposes of this section must meet the following criteria:
a. The square footage of the interior area of the restaurant, which is enclosed and under roof and is conditioned air space, shall be determined using a set of building plans showing the fixed and other seating and tables; 
b. The food preparation service areas (kitchen, buffet and salad bar areas), storage, the preparation area behind bars, restrooms and all connecting hallways shall be removed from the total square footage of the floor space; 
c. The maximum occupant load for the remaining areas shall be calculated in accordance with the building code and life safety code as follows: 
1. The assembly area where restaurant seating is located shall be calculated using 15 square feet per person; 
2. The waiting area at the entrance/exit shall be calculated using three square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for waiting area cannot exceed 50 percent of the occupant load of the assembly area in subsection (7)c.1 of this section; 
3. An additional area for live entertainment and dancing shall be calculated using seven square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for this additional area cannot exceed 20 percent of the occupant load of the assembly areas in subsection (7)c.1 of this section; 
4. The board of commissioners may consider a request for consumption on the premises of a deck or patio attached or adjacent to the principal restaurant assembly area. If such a request is granted, it does not alter the calculation of the maximum occupant load; 
d. The occupancy load determined by the county manager for each location shall be posted for public view; 
(8) Maintain at all times the number of tables, chairs, and booths for patrons in substantially the same general configuration as submitted on the set of building plans used to determine the occupancy load. Nothing herein shall prohibit the temporary placing of tables together to accommodate a larger dining party, provided the total number of tables, chairs and booths available for patron use in the assembly area where restaurant seating is located must equal the number shown on the building plans submitted for occupancy purposes, with adequate space between them for normal movement of patrons and employees. The intent of this provision is to prohibit the removal at any time of the restaurant's seating or table capacity, as shown for occupancy load purposes, to accommodate more than the allowed number of patrons within the assembly area of the restaurant. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-123), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-267. - Private club. 
No liquor by the drink license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-124), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-268. - Illumination of premises, location of sales restricted. 
(a) The premises including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b) The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1) Private parties which have been scheduled in advance;
(2) Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant is located on the premises; 
(3) Private clubs.
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-126), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-269. - Hours of sale. 
Liquor by the drink licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of liquor by the drink between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, with consumption of purchased beverages on the premises until 2:00 a.m.; on Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-127), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-270. - Dancing on premises generally prohibited; exceptions. 
Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for liquor by the drink sales only where: 
(1) Adequate space exists;
(2) All fire and safety regulations are met.
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-128), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-271. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
All alcoholic beverages sold by liquor by the drink licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises to any public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way, or in any public or semipublic parking facility within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-129), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-272. - Prohibition of certain types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(a) Findings; public purpose. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences the board of commissioners believe are relevant to the problems faced by Ben Hill County, Georgia, the board of commissioners take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of county commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this subsection, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. 
(b) Enactment. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse liquor by the drink: 
(1) The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of liquor by the drink while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2) Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-130), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-273. - Pricing of liquor by the drink. 
(a) This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to liquor by the drink.
(b) No licensee or holder of a license to sell liquor by the drink, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: 
(1) Sponsor, conduct, encourage or allow on the licensed premises any game or contest or promotion which either: 
a. Involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as the prize; or 
b. Has as its primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(2) Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to a customer liquor by the drink in any container other than a glass or plastic cup. 
(3) Sell, offer to sell, deliver, or allow any alcoholic beverage to be inserted into the mouth of a customer in any manner by anyone other than by the customer. 
(4) Charge any minimum charge, cover charge, admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge which discriminates on the basis of gender, race, age, creed, or national origin. 
(5) Deny entry or service to any person at any time on the basis of gender, race, age, creed, or national origin. 
(c) No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-131), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-274. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees under this article or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-132), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-275—6-296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EXCISE TAX ON MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 6-297. - Imposition of tax. 
There is imposed upon the sale of liquor by the drink in the county a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of each drink to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of such taxes; provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the county. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-136), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-298. - Collection. 
Every liquor by the drink licensee shall collect the tax imposed by section 6-297 from purchasers of all such drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the board of county commissioners and the county manager to facilitate the collection of the tax. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of such drink to the purchasers. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-137), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-299. - Payment to the county. 
(a) Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in every calendar month to the county not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(b) On or before the 20th day of each month, a return shall be filed with the county clerk for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the county clerk may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of liquor by the drink and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-138), 12-17-2010) 
Secs. 6-300—6-316. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ONE-DAY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PERMIT FOR BONA FIDE NONPROFIT CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 6-317. - Permit required. 
(a) For purposes of this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" shall mean a nonprofit corporation licensed and authorized to do business in the state which has been issued a letter or certificate of exemption from the payment of federal income taxes by the United States Internal Revenue Service under 26 USC 501(c). Written proof of such exemption shall be filed with the application. 
(b) In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-9-3, the county shall be authorized to issue a permit to a bona fide nonprofit organization to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises where sold for a period not to exceed one day, subject to compliance with the provisions of this section. The sale and serving of such alcoholic beverages shall be made by the drink, and a permit shall be required hereunder at any event held or sponsored by such organization where alcoholic beverages are to be purchased or served, or both, whether such alcoholic beverages are purchased by the attendees by the payment of dues to the organization or as a result of the purchase of a ticket or the payment of an entry fee to the event. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such organization which already has a valid alcoholic beverage license from the county shall not be required to obtain a permit hereunder. 
(c) The net proceeds from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the organization at such event shall be used only for the charitable purposes of the organization and for no other purpose. 
(d) No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages thereunder unless the applicant shall also have been issued a valid one-day permit for the same event by the state department of revenue, and such one-day permit from the department of revenue shall also be displayed at the location of the event in the manner required by the department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-139(a), (b), (h), (j)), 12-17-2010) 
Sec. 6-319. - Suspension of permit. 
(a) Any one-day permit used hereunder may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article in the same manner and for the same reasons as an alcoholic beverage license may be suspended or revoked for regular alcoholic beverage license holders hereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any suspension of such permit may also be made by the sheriff immediately should the organization be found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this division during the period of time that the one-day permit is in effect. 
(b) No organization which has had its alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked within the previous 24 months shall be eligible to obtain a permit under this division. 
(Ord. No. 10-04, § 1(6-139(f), (i)), 12-17-2010) 
Chapters 7—9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; dogfighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1) Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2) Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog poses an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3) While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dog control officer means the person appointed by the board of commissioners whose duties shall include enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top; and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records maintained by the animal control officer pursuant to this article. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Code 2000, § 10-31; Ord. No. 89-2, § 1, 5-2-1989; Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-20. - Nuisances; record. 
The animal control officer shall keep a permanent record of the names and addresses of persons who file complaints with him as to animals guilty of being a nuisance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 10-34; Ord. No. 93-2, § 11, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-21. - License fees. 
In order to curtail irresponsibility by pet owners and decrease the drastic overpopulation, license fees must vary. A separate license fee shall be charged for spayed or neutered animals and for unspayed and unneutered animals. Such fees are set by the board of county commissioners by ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § 10-37; Ord. No. 93-2, § 14, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-22. - Animal control officer. 
The county will appoint an animal control officer who is charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article. The animal control officer shall serve as the dog control officer. The board of commissioners shall appoint such additional animal control officers as it considers appropriate and proper, who shall also have the powers and authority to enforce this article. 
(Code 2000, § 10-38; Ord. No. 93-2, § 15, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-23. - County veterinarian. 
The board of commissioners may from time to time designate a veterinarian located within the county as the county veterinarian. 
(Code 2000, § 10-39; Ord. No. 93-2, § 16, 2-2-1993) 
Secs. 10-24—10-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOGS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 10-50. - Inoculation. 
(a) All dogs owned or kept within the unincorporated limits of the county shall be inoculated with a rabies vaccine for immunizing dogs against rabies annually on or before April 30 in each year. Such vaccine shall be administered to such dogs by a regular licensed veterinarian, licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine. Such veterinarian shall furnish to the owner or keeper of any such dog a certificate of inoculation showing the date of inoculation, the name, age, sex, color and markings of such dog and the owner or keeper's name and address. 
(b) All dogs brought into the county shall be inoculated with a rabies vaccine for immunizing dogs against rabies within ten days from the date they are brought into the county unless such dogs are less than eight weeks old, in which event they shall be inoculated when they become eight weeks old. All dogs born in the county shall be inoculated when they become eight weeks old, and all such dogs shall be inoculated annually thereafter. 
(Code 2000, § 10-61; Ord. No. 93-2, § 2, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-51. - Dog tag required. 
It shall be the duty of a veterinarian inoculating a dog against rabies to issue to the owner or person responsible for the dog a metal tag showing that the dog has been inoculated as required in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 10-62; Ord. No. 93-2, § 3, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-52. - Dogs suspected of rabies. 
Whenever any dog within the unincorporated area of the county shall have been bitten by a dog or other animal suffering with rabies or suspected of rabies, or whenever any dog within the unincorporated area of the county shall show signs or indications of viciousness, the county veterinarian shall have power and authority to take such dog into his custody and keep the dog in quarantine for such length of time as may be necessary to determine whether or not such dog is likely to develop rabies and shall have authority to kill such dog and send its head to the state department or board of health for examination. 
(Code 2000, § 10-65; Ord. No. 93-2, § 6, 2-2-1993) 
Secs. 10-53—10-77. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 10-78. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to own or possess a dog that is kept or permitted to run at large within the unincorporated area of the county unless such person has applied for and obtained a license for the dog. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2000, § 10-86; Ord. No. 93-2, § 7, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-79. - Manner of applying for and obtaining. 
Any person desiring to own or possess a dog kept or permitted to run at large within the unincorporated area of the county shall make application in writing to the county manager on or before March 31 of each year, or within 30 days after the dog becomes subject to this article, on forms to be provided by the county. The application shall include the name and address, home and/or business telephone number, occupation, and age of the applicant, and shall further include the name, variety, age, sex, color and weight of the dog, the date on which the dog was last inoculated for rabies and the type (one-year or three-year) inoculation received, and number of other dogs, if any, kept or permitted to run at large by the applicant within the unincorporated area of the county, and the number and dates of any substantial complaints of violations of this article previously made against the dog. The application shall be accompanied by a license fee of an amount set by ordinance by the board of county commissioners and contained in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk. Upon approval of such application, the applicant shall be issued a colored metal tag on which shall be imprinted the name and address of the owner, and a license number, which shall be visible and legible at a distance of ten feet. This tag shall be affixed to the collar of the dog and shall be worn by the dog at all times. 
(Code 2000, § 10-87; Ord. No. 93-2, § 8, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-80. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a) Any person who incurs property damage or personal injury caused by a dog within the unincorporated area of the county may file a verified complaint against the dog, identifying the dog by variety, if possible, and, in any event, by color of the dog and tag color and number. The owner of the dog shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a copy of the complaint and a summons directing him to appear in magistrate court at a date and time not less than ten days from the date of mailing the notice. If the return receipt is received less than five days prior to the date of the hearing, the matter shall be continued until the next regularly scheduled session of magistrate court. At the session of court, the complainant shall appear and present evidence in support of his complaint, and the owner may oppose the same by cross examination and by presentation of evidence. The court shall then determine whether the complaint has been sustained by a preponderance of the evidence; and if so, the complaint shall be deemed to have been substantiated, and the dog license shall be suspended. 
(b) During the period in which a dog license is suspended, the dog shall not be permitted to run at large within the unincorporated area of the county, but rather shall at all times be restrained by a leash or kept within an enclosure. The duration of the suspension shall not be in excess of 12 months. The fact that a dog license is suspended when it expires shall not be grounds for refusing to issue a new license. 
(c) If two or more complaints are substantiated against a dog or if a dog is apprehended running at large within the unincorporated area of the county while the license for the dog is suspended, the license for such dog shall be revoked, according to the procedure set forth in subsection (a) of this section, and thereafter no license shall be issued to any owner of such dog. If such dog is thereafter apprehended running at large within the unincorporated area of the county, the dog's owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If no owner of such dog can be located within seven days from the date of apprehension, the dog shall be disposed of in a humane manner. During the seven days, the dog shall be kept by the county veterinarian. 
(Code 2000, § 10-88; Ord. No. 93-2, § 9, 2-2-1993) 
Sec. 10-81. - Unlicensed dogs running at large. 
Any dog apprehended running at large within the unincorporated area of the county, and is not at such time licensed, shall be kept with the humane society or any other facility approved by the board of county commissioners for a period of seven days, during which time a notice containing a description of the dog and the date of apprehension shall be posted on the bulletin board of the county courthouse. If the owner of the dog appears and claims the dog, he shall pay a fine in an amount contained in the schedule of fees on file in the office of the county clerk, for each day or portion thereof during which the dog was kept by the county veterinarian, and shall further be required to obtain a license as provided in this subdivision before he is entitled to take possession of the dog. If at the end of seven days the dog has not been claimed, it shall be disposed of in a humane manner. 
(Code 2000, § 10-89; Ord. No. 93-2, § 10, 2-2-1993) 
Secs. 10-82—10-105. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Dangerous Dogs 

Sec. 10-106. - Investigation; report. 
(a) Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(b) When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the county animal control board on the dog control officer's determination within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall also provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. 
(c) When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the county animal control board for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the county animal control board conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the county animal control board conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(d) Within ten days after the hearing, the county animal control board which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(e) Judicial review of the county animal control board's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A § 50-13-19. 
(Code 2000, § 10-111; Ord. No. 89-2, § 2(1), (2), 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 10-107. - Impoundment. 
A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
Sec. 10-108. - Court-ordered euthanasia. 
The judge of any superior court of competent jurisdiction within this state may order the euthanasia of a dog if the court finds, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by section 10-106, that the dog has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and: 
(1) The owner or custodian of the dog has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog; or 
(2) Any local governmental authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting the euthanasia of the dog. 
Sec. 10-109. - Euthanasia for dogs with repeat offenses. 
A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by section 10-106, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this section. 
Sec. 10-110. - Certificate of registration; insurance or bond for a dangerous dog. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the county a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b) Unless otherwise specified by this article, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1) The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2) Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c) The dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a vicious dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer, or if the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence that: 
(1) The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2) Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3) A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; 
(4) The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog; and 
(5) Payment to the county of a fee specified by the board of county commissioners to defray the cost of administering and enforcing this section. 
(d) No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e) No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog.
(f) No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1) A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A § 17-10-6.1;
(2) The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A § 6-12-4; or 
(3) A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g) Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this subdivision. 
(Code 2000, § 10-113; Ord. No. 89-2, § 2(4), (7), 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 10-111. - Notification regarding change of status. 
(a) The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b) A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c) The owner of a classified dog who moves from one jurisdiction to the county shall register the classified dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this county shall register the dog as required in O.C.G.A § 4-8-27 within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Code 2000, § 10-114; Ord. No. 89-2, § 2(5), (6), 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 10-112. - Possession of dangerous or vicious dog without certificate; keeping of dog in violation of conditions of certificate; confiscation and impoundment; destruction of animal. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1) The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2) The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or
(3) The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be:
(1) Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a. The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b. The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or
(2) Unattended with minors.
(c) A person who violates subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(d) Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this subdivision so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(Code 2000, § 10-115; Ord. No. 89-2, § 3, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 10-113. - Confiscation by dog control officer; payment of costs for recovery; euthanasia. 
(a) A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this subdivision. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this subdivision. 
(b) The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this subdivision may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this subdivision. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c) In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this subdivision within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
Sec. 10-114. - Penalties. 
(a) Except as otherwise specified in this subdivision, any person who violates any provision of this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this subdivision shall be punished by the issuance of a state warrant pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28 and upon conviction shall be subject to those penalties. 
(1) The owner of a dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this subdivision or whose dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 10-113 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for the second conviction a fine of not less than $500.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $750.00 shall be imposed. 
(2) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of this subdivision or whose potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under section 10-113 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this subsection, for a second conviction a fine of not less than $150.00 shall be imposed and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than $300.00 shall be imposed. 
(Code 2000, § 10-116; Ord. No. 89-2, § 4, 5-2-1989) 
Secs. 10-115—10-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL CONTROL FOR THE UNINCORPORATED AREA 

Sec. 10-142. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the "Animal Control Regulations of Ben Hill County." 
(Code 2000, §§ 10-141; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-1, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, except human beings. 
Animal control officer means an employee or agent of the county, designated by the county manager to administer and enforce the requirements contained within this division. 
Animal shelter means any facility operated by either Ben Hill County, Georgia, or the Fitzgerald-Ben Hill County Humane Society for the temporary care, confinement and detention of animals and for the humane killing and other disposition of animals. The term "animal shelter" shall also include any private facility authorized by the county manager to impound, confine, detain, care for or destroy any animal. 
At large means that an animal is off the property of its owner and not under restraint. Exceptions are: domestic cats; a dog while actually working livestock, locating or retrieving wild game in season for a licensed hunter, assisting law enforcement officers or while actually being trained for any of these specifically enumerated pursuits; and an animal that is within the confines of the real property that the owner had permission to use or is within a motor vehicle (excluding an unleashed animal in an open bed of a truck). 
Cat means any animal of the feline species. 
County means the unincorporated area of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
Guard or attack dog means a dog trained to attack on command or to protect persons or property, and who will cease to attack upon command. 
Impoundment means the taking into custody of an animal by any police officer, animal control officer, or any authorized representative thereof. 
Leash or lead means a thong, cord, rope, chain or similar tether which holds an animal in restraint and which is not more than six feet in length. A leash or lead longer than six feet in length or a retractable lead of variable length may be used when exercising or training an animal, provided that the use of the leash or lead does not allow the animal to interfere with public access to or use of public areas. 
Owner means any person having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to, any animal covered by this division. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) Any animal that is at large;
(2) Any animal in any section of publicly-owned property unless the animal is controlled by leash or lead; 
(3) Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner; 
(4) Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(5) Any animal that causes fouling the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(6) Any animal in heat that is not humanely confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals; 
(7) Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons on a public right-of-way; 
(8) Any animal that chases motor vehicles, bicycles or individuals in a public right-of-way;
(9) Any animal that attacks domestic animals;
(10) Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(11) Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue either of the number of animals maintained at a single location or the inadequacy of the facilities; and 
(12) Any animal not in compliance with either state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health relative to rabies control. 
Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness necessary to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Under restraint means that an animal is either secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal or beside a competent person and is obedient to that person's commands. 
Vicious or dangerous animal means any animal that attacks, bites, or physically injuries human beings, domestic animals, or livestock without adequate provocation, or which, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or physically injure human beings, domestic animals, or livestock. Any animal that without provocation has bitten or attacked a human being or other animal shall be prima facie presumed vicious or dangerous. 
(Code 2000, § 10-142; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-2, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-144. - Nuisances. 
No owner shall keep any animal on any property located within the county when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance animal. 
(Code 2000, § 10-143; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-3, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-145. - Caring for animals. 
(a) An owner of an animal must provide proper air, space, and protection from the elements and a sanitary and safe living environment, and veterinary care. 
(b) No owner of any animal shall willfully abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(c) No owner of any animal shall fail to comply with either state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health relative to rabies control. 
(Code 2000, § 10-144; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-4, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-146. - Sanitation. 
(a) No owner of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area, or upon private property other than that of the owner, unless such owner immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by such animal by the following methods: 
(1) Collection of the feces by appropriate implement and placement in a paper or plastic bag or other container; and 
(2) Removal of such bag or container to the property of the animal owner and disposition thereafter in a manner as otherwise may be permitted by law. 
(b) No owner of any animal shall permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property of the owner or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's property or to abutting property of others. 
(c) No owner of any animal shall cause unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(Code 2000, § 10-145; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-5, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-147. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a) No owner or any other person shall willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act that causes either injury or death to such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or dangerous animals. 
(b) No owner or any other person shall administer poison to any animal or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injury any animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. 
(Code 2000, § 10-146; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-6, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-148. - Restraint and confinement generally. 
(a) No owner of any animal shall allow such animal to be at large.
(b) No owner of any animal shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance animal. 
(c) Every owner of a guard or attack dog shall keep such dog confined in a building, compartment or other enclosure. Any such enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a fence at least six feet in height and shall be topped with an anti-climbing device constructed of angle metal braces with at least three strands of equally separated barbed wire stretched between them. All anti-climbing devices shall extend inward at an angle of not less than 45 degrees nor more than 90 degrees when measured from the perpendicular. The areas of confinement shall all have gates and entrances thereto securely closed and locked, and all fences properly maintained and escape proof. The premises on which a guard or attack dog is located must be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is such a dog on the property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs owned or controlled by government law enforcement agencies. 
(d) Every animal in heat shall be confined by its owner in a building or other enclosure in such a manner that the animal cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding purposes as allowed by either state law or rules and regulations promulgated by the state department of agriculture. 
(e) Every vicious or dangerous animal shall be confined by its owner or authorized agent of its owner within a building or secure enclosure and, whenever off the premises of its owner, shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not more than three feet in length, or caged. Every person harboring a vicious or dangerous animal is charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that children do not have access to such animal. The premises on which the vicious or dangerous animal is located must be posted with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a vicious or dangerous animal on the property. 
(Code 2000, § 10-147; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-7, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-149. - Return of animal to owner. 
If the name of the owner of an animal found at large is known or can be obtained with reasonable dispatch, the animal control officer shall return the animal to the residential address of the owner. If there is no one present, the animal control officer shall leave written notice of whom the owner must contact to reclaim the animal. The officer shall then remove the animal to an animal shelter. 
(Code 2000, § 10-148; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-8, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-150. - Impoundment. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in this division, an animal control officer or a police officer may impound and confine to an animal shelter any of the following animals: 
(1) Any animal at large;
(2) Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public;
(3) Any vicious or dangerous animal;
(4) Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of the chief health officer of the county; 
(5) Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care;
(6) Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;
(7) Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
(8) Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous, or dangerous where an animal control officer or the county manager determines that there is a threat to public health and safety; 
(9) Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; or 
(10) Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, or has been arrested or evicted from his regular place of residence. 
(Code 2000, § 10-149; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-9, 2-10-2004) 
Sec. 10-152. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) It shall be a violation of this division to:
(1) Fail to comply with any provision; or
(2) Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer or police officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed. 
(b) Any person violating any provision of this division, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00. If a violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c) In addition to any other remedy available, this division may be enforced in the magistrate court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 through 15-10-66, as amended. 
(Code 2000, § 10-151; Ord. No. 04-02, § 10-11, 2-10-2004) 
Chapters 11—13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Building official. 
The board of commissioners shall have the authority to designate a building inspector for the county. The building inspector has the authority to inspect buildings and structures to ensure they meet the current building codes. 
Sec. 14-2. - Permits required for providing utility services. 
No person engaged in the business of furnishing utility, water, gas or sewage disposal, referred to in this section as "utility services," shall provide any utility services to a dwelling or other structure for which permits are required to be issued under the terms of this chapter and/or the applicable building, electrical and plumbing codes adopted pursuant to this chapter unless the owner or occupant of such property for which utility services are being furnished shall have first obtained all of the permits required to be issued pursuant to this chapter from the building official prior to the furnishing of utility services or prior to utility services being made available to the dwelling or structure. 
(Code 2000, § 14-1; Res. of 7-7-1987, § 17) 
State law reference— Regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
Secs. 14-3—14-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. (Back)
Sec. 14-23. - Adoption of technical codes. 
The technical building and construction codes as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 are adopted by reference as the official codes of the county, and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25): 
(1) International Building Code (IBC), 2006 Edition;
(2) National Electrical Code (NFPA), 2011 Edition;
(3) International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2006 Edition;
(4) International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2006 Edition;
(5) International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2006 Edition;
(6) International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC), 2006 Edition;
(7) International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2009 Edition;
(8) International Fire Code (IFC), 2012 Edition;
(9) International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2006 Edition;
(10) International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), 2006 Edition.
(Code 2000, § 14-31) 
Sec. 14-24. - Self-inspection exemption. 
The board of commissioners, pursuant to 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1046), page 1632, exempts the county from the alternative inspection procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). 
(Code 2000, § 14-31; Res. of 7-2-1996) 
Sec. 14-25. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a) This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building official. 
(b) Any person violating this article shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 
(Code 2000, § 14-33) 
Secs. 14-26—14-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Flow rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. (Back)
Sec. 14-54. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 2000, § 14-66; Ord. No. 91-1, § 1, 1-8-1991) 
Sec. 14-55. - Restricted residential construction. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the unincorporated area of the county for any residential building of any type that employs a: 
(1) Gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.28 gallons of water per flush; however, this subsection shall not be applied to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2) Showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3) Urinal that uses more than an average of 0.5 gallons of water per flush;
(4) Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5) Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 2000, § 14-67; Ord. No. 91-1, § 2, 1-8-1991) 
Sec. 14-56. - Restricted commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the unincorporated area of the county for any commercial building of any type that does not meet the requirements of section 14-55(1) through (5). 
(Code 2000, § 14-68; Ord. No. 91-1, § 3, 1-8-1991) 
Sec. 14-57. - Application of article to repair, renovation. 
The requirements of section 14-55 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Code 2000, § 14-69; Ord. No. 91-1, § 4, 1-8-1991) 
Sec. 14-59. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a) This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector. 
(b) Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished as provided in section 1-11. Any violators of this article shall be prosecuted in the magistrate court of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 14-71; Ord. No. 91-1, § 6, 1-8-1991) 
Chapters 15—17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 18-19. - Occupation tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation that has one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated area of the county, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county manager or his deputies or to any law enforcement officer of the county upon request. 
(Code 2000, § 18-31; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-1, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any person engaged in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes and who employs one or more employees. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee. 
(1) The term "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
(2) An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2. 
Gross receipts. 
(1) The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
a. Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;
b. Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness;
c. Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;
d. Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
e. Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income.
(2) The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following:
a. Sales, use or excise tax;
b. Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
c. Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d. Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e. Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f. Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or practitioner of occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The terms "practitioner of profession" and "practitioner of occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 2000, § 18-32; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-2, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-21. - Regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a) Regulatory fee imposed. A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses or practitioners of a profession or occupation where the county customarily performs investigation or inspection of such businesses or practitioners of such profession or occupation as protection of the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or local building, health, or safety code. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(b) Regulatory fee schedule. The regulatory fee schedule for persons in the occupations and professions covered by subsection (a) of this section is set forth by ordinance and contained in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c) Appeal. Should the business or practitioner object to the amount so set, it shall have the right to appeal the amount of such fee to the board of commissioners upon ten days' notice of the date, time and place of such hearing. Such person and the county manager shall have the right to be heard on such terms as the board of commissioners shall reasonably determine. The decision of the board of commissioners as to the amount of such fee shall be final. 
(Code 2000, § 18-33; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-3, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-22. - Occupation tax. 
(a) Levied. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated area of the county and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b) Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation is set forth by ordinance and contained in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(c) Restrictions. 
(1) No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2) No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the county and who sell property inside the county. 
(3) The number of employees of the business or practitioner shall be determined by adding the number of full-time employees to the number of full-time position equivalents. For purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added, and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce the number of full-time position equivalents. Fractional numbers shall be rounded to the next whole number. The number of full-time employees plus the number of full-time position equivalents shall determine the number of employees for determining the amount of the occupation tax. 
(Code 2000, § 18-34; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-4, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-23. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1) Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2) Owns personal or real property that generates income and is located within the unincorporated part of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 18-35; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-5, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-24. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the county shall identify the dominant line of business the business conducts. 
(Code 2000, § 18-36; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-6, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-25. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 2000, § 18-37; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-7, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-26. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) to (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1) The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 18-22 
(2) A fee schedule per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service from the schedule referenced in subsection (5) of this section, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the county relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3) This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be made by November 1 of each year. 
(4) A business through which one or more practitioners of professions practice their profession, either directly or indirectly through a partnership, professional corporation or association, or other similar entity, shall not be liable for a separate occupation tax or fee if all such professionals pay the tax imposed by this section. 
(5) The occupation tax for professions that are governed by this section shall be set forth by ordinance by the board of county commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 18-38; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-8, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-27. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by or who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 2000, § 18-39; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-9, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-28. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § 18-40; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-10, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-29. - Registration form; when tax and regulatory fee due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a) Each person required to pay an occupation tax or regulatory fee by this article shall complete and file with the county clerk on or before November 1 of each year an occupation tax/regulatory fee registration on forms furnished by the county clerk for such purpose. 
(b) Each such occupation tax and regulatory fee shall be for each year, unless otherwise specifically provided. The regulatory fee and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 15 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling, the registration and occupation tax shall be delinquent 30 days following the commencement of business. On any new profession, trade or calling, the regulatory fee shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business, subject to the exceptions listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20(c). The tax or fee registration shall be issued by the county manager; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the magistrate court, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00 or imprisonment not to exceed five days, or either or both in the discretion of the judge. 
(c) If a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year was not conducted for any period of time in the county in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. The occupation tax for any business registering and opening for business after July 1 shall be 50 percent of the tax that would be otherwise applicable for that year only. 
(d) Should any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed in this article remain due and unpaid for 90 days after the due date of the tax or fee, the person liable for the tax or fee shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. Any occupation tax or regulatory fee shall further bear interest from the due date thereof at the rate of 1.5 percent per month. 
(Code 2000, § 18-41; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-11, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-30. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from that business is devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 18-42; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-12, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-31. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a) Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b) Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 2000, § 18-43; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-13, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-32. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 2000, § 18-44; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-14, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-33. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1) Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2) Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(3) Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4) Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5) Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
(6) Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7) Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355, businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8) Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9) Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10) Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Code 2000, § 18-45; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-34. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, that business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Code 2000, § 18-46; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.1, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-35. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case, the county manager, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The county manager shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county, and upon demand of the county manager such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the county manager at his discretion. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 2000, § 18-47; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.2, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-36. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns and permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay its occupation tax or any part of the tax before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, any business tax registration granted by the county under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid, or to any person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the county manager in accordance with provisions found in section 18-35. In the case of those practitioners where the county cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the county in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 2000, § 18-48; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.3, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-37. - Execution taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the county manager, upon any taxes becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the person liable for the tax, as well as the penalty and interest imposed in section 18-29(d). The execution of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment of the tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff, deputy or marshal of the county upon the property of the defendant located in the county; and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings shall be had as is provided by the ordinances of the county and the laws of the state; and the defendant shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(Code 2000, § 18-49; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.4, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-38. - Enforcement. 
It is the duty of the county manager to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the court. It is the further duty of the county manager to inspect all registrations issued by the county as often as in his judgment he may deem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under the license. 
(Code 2000, § 18-52; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.7, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-39. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 18-55; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.10, 6-6-1995) 
Sec. 18-40. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific shall control. 
(Code 2000, § 18-56; Ord. No. 95-4, § 16-15.11, 6-6-1995) 
Secs. 18-41—18-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (Back)
Sec. 18-69. - Business license tax. 
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institutions means state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Gross receipts means as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-95. 
(b) Levied. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the state gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. 
(Code 2000, § 18-86; Res. of 10-5-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 18-70. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to section 18-69 shall be established by ordinance and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 18-87; Res. of 10-5-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 18-71. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. This return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 2000, § 18-88; Res. of 10-5-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 18-72. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 18-71, unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 18-89; Res. of 10-5-1983, § 4) 
Secs. 18-73—18-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. (Back)
Sec. 18-103. - Tax levied. 
(a) Life insurance companies. 
(1) The board of commissioners levies and imposes a county tax for county purposes on each life insurance company doing business within the state in the amount of one percent of the gross direct premiums received from policies insuring persons residing within the unincorporated area of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1(b). 
(2) The tax levied by this article shall not apply to the gross direct premiums of an insurance company that qualifies pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-5 for the reduction to one-half of one percent of the state tax imposed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, and the tax imposed by this article shall not apply to annuity considerations. Such life insurance companies shall be entitled to all credits and abatements as provided by law, and the tax shall be deducted and distributed as provided for by state law. 
(b) Other insurance companies. The county levies a tax at the rate set forth in the schedule of fees and charges set by the board of county commissioners and on file in the office of the county clerk upon the gross direct premiums of all foreign, alien and domestic insurance companies doing business in this state other than life insurance companies, which tax shall be in addition to the taxes levied by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. This tax shall be levied upon the gross direct premiums received by such companies. The tax shall be imposed without any deductions other than those as are allowed by law. The tax shall be collected, deducted and distributed as provided for by state law. 
(Code 2000, § 18-121; Res. of 7-6-1983) 
Sec. 18-104. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds from the county taxes levied in this article shall be separated from other county funds and shall be used by the board of commissioners solely for the purpose of reducing ad valorem taxes of the inhabitants of the unincorporated areas of the county and the millage rate for the county shall be reduced within the unincorporated areas of the county to offset all of the proceeds derived from any tax provided for by this article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-122; Res. of 7-6-1983) 
Secs. 18-105—18-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION 

Sec. 18-122. - Denial, revocation or suspension of business occupation tax certificates. 
(a) Grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of business occupation tax certificate. A business occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter may be denied, revoked or suspended at the discretion of the board of commissioners, or upon its authority by the county manager. More specifically, a business occupation tax certificate shall be denied, revoked, or suspended by the board of commissioners, or upon its authority by the county manager, and considered void, upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1) The original application or renewal thereof contains false or misleading information, the applicant omitted material facts in the application or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(2) The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any county codes or ordinances; 
(3) The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(4) The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate is engaging in false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5) The holder of the certificate is operating under a business or trade name not listed on the current application on file with the county; 
(6) The holder of the certificate fails to maintain the initial requirements for obtaining the certificate; 
(7) The applicant for, or holder of, a certificate is classified as, or becomes classified as, a habitual violator under title 40, chapter 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 40-5-58), or is found to be operating the business under the influence of alcohol or of illegal drugs or substances; 
(8) The applicant for, or holder of, a certificate is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics, or stimulants to such an extent the applicant or holder is unable to perform his duties under the business or occupation; 
(9) The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any sexual offense, the offense of false swearing, the offense of operating an adult entertainment establishment in violation of the distance requirements of title 36, chapter 60 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3), or to any offense involving the lottery, illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages, or possession or receipt of stolen property, for a period of five years prior to the filing of the application. If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant is found to be not of good moral character, convicted, pleads guilty or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses specified in this subsection, said certificate shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation; 
(10) The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate fails to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees when due; 
(11) The establishment has been declared a public or private nuisance or has created threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(12) The applicant for, or holder of, the certificate is guilty of fraud in the operation of the business or occupation he practiced, or fraud or deceit in being licensed to practice in that area; 
(13) Any other violation of this article; or
(14) Any violation of any rule or regulation of the county now in force or hereafter adopted.
(b) False or misleading information. No business tax certificate shall be issued or renewed pursuant to any provisions of this article to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within the 12 months immediately preceding the filing with the department of finance of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished false or misleading information in any application or having omitted material facts in any application. 
(c) No transfer of certificate. No business occupation certificate issued hereunder may be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 2-2009, § 1(18-123), 2-2009) 
Sec. 18-123. - Investigation of conduct or actions of applicant, business or tax certificate holder for purposes of denial, revocation or suspension of business occupation tax certificate. 
Upon having reasonable suspicion, the county manager is authorized to coordinate with the county sheriff for the purposes of performing an investigation of any applicant, business or holder of a business occupation tax certificate to determine whether such has committed an act found to be grounds for a denial, revocation or suspension of a business tax certificate pursuant to section 18-122. 
(Ord. No. 2-2009, § 1(18-124(1)), 2-2009) 
Sec. 18-124. - Notice of denial, revocation or suspension. 
(a) Upon finding cause to deny an application seeking issuance or renewal of a business occupation tax certificate, or to revoke or suspend a business occupation tax certificate, the county manager shall provide written notification of such decision to the applicant or holder of the certificate within five calendar days of the decision. The written notification shall state the grounds for the denial, revocation or suspension, and shall be served via hand delivery to the applicant or holder at the business location and sending a copy of such notice via registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address listed by the applicant or holder on the application for a certificate. In the event that service by hand delivery is not able to be made upon the applicant or holder within the five calendar days, then service via registered mail, return receipt requested, shall be sufficient to complete service required pursuant to this section. 
(b) The written notification shall also state that said decision is temporary but will become the permanent decision of the board of commissioners and the county if the applicant or holder fails to follow the grievance and appeal process identified in section 18-126 
(Ord. No. 2-2009, § 1(18-125(1)), 2-2009) 
Sec. 18-126. - Administration; procedure for grievances and appeals. 
The county manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. Should an aggrieved person or entity desire to appeal a decision under this article, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1) A notice of appeal must be filed with the county manager within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision complained of. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter, and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the county manager. The notice shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices and decisions of the board of commissioners. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the allowed time, the right to appeal is lost and the temporary decision of the county manager shall become permanent. 
(2) Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the county manager shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The hearing shall be held before the board of commissioners at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners following the date of appellant filing said notice of appeal with the county manager, unless otherwise decided by the board of commissioners. The county manager shall transmit to the board of commissioners all documents or materials constituting the record of the action or proceedings of this section. 
(3) If the county manager deems it necessary that an audit of the financial books/records of appellant be conducted, the county shall notify the appellant in writing of a reasonable date, time and place for the audit, which shall be conducted prior to the date of a hearing on the matter. The county manager may hire outside auditors for this purpose. The expense of hiring outside auditors shall be borne by the county if the position of the appellant is sustained by the audit. If not, the expense of the outside auditors shall be due and payable from appellant as part of the costs of appeal. 
(4) An appeal under this section shall stay all legal proceedings with regard to collection of the occupation tax from an appellant; however, such appeal shall not preclude the county from pursuing legal proceedings to enjoin any violation of this article or of any other section of this Code. 
(5) Appeals before the board of commissioners. In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
a. The board of commissioners shall be convened and shall, for purposes of hearing appeals of adverse actions pursuant to this section, also be known as the certificate review board. 
b. The proceedings before the certificate review board shall be recorded, and all documents and other materials considered by the certificate review board shall be preserved as the record of the proceedings. The record of the proceedings shall be preserved for not less than 150 calendar days after the hearing. 
c. Any alleged violations or misconduct levied against the appellant and scheduled for a hearing before the certificate review board shall be read completely to the appellant at the commencement of the hearing, unless waived by the appellant. 
d. The certificate review board may receive evidence in support of the alleged violations or misconduct as filed against the appellant. Decisions of the certificate review board are to be supported by the evidence accepted and admitted during the hearing. 
e. The county shall bear the burden of proof. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
f. The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present the case-in-chief in support of the alleged violations or misconduct; the appellant may present a case-in-chief, if desired. Each party may be allowed to present one case-in-rebuttal. 
g. The appellant and county may be represented by counsel, may present evidence, and may examine and cross examine witnesses. Additionally, members of the certificate review board are permitted to question witnesses. A party is permitted to no more than 15 minutes to present that party's case-in-chief; a case-in-chief in rebuttal is permitted no more than ten minutes of presentation. Presentation of arguments and evidence may be in oral or written form, except that affidavits of individuals who are unavailable for cross examination shall not be accepted or admitted by the certificate review board nor considered by the board. 
h. Following the presentation of evidence, the board shall issue a written decision within 30 calendar days of the date of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, via registered or certified mail, to the parties or the parties' representatives. For the appellant, the decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the notice of appeal. Should the certificate review board fail to issue a timely decision, on the 31st day after the hearing, the appellant may seek review as if a decision adverse to the appellant has been rendered. 
i. The findings of the certificate review board shall be final unless a party files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county within 30 calendar days of the decision of the certificate review board. 
(Ord. No. 2-2009, § 1(18-125(2)), 2-2009) 
Chapters 19—21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19); Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 System, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - 911 service charge. 
(a) Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-133(a) and 46-5-134(a), the board of commissioners imposes upon each exchange access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access lines are in the area served or which would be served by the enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system in the county an amount set by the board of county commissioners by ordinance. All exchange access facilities billed to federal, state or local government shall be exempt from the 911 charge. Collection under this section is to be sent to the board of county commissioners. Funds will be deposited directly into the 911 account. 
(b) Each service subscriber shall, on behalf of the county, collect the 911 charge for those telephone subscribers to whom it provides exchange telephone service in the area served by the county enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system. 
(c) As a part of its monthly billing process, the service supplier shall collect the 911 charge for each month an exchange access facility is in service, and it shall list the 911 charge as a separate entry on each bill. 
(d) If the service supplier receives a partial payment for a monthly bill from a telephone subscriber, the service supplier shall apply the payment against the amount the telephone subscriber owes the service supplier first. 
(Code 2000, § 22-1; Ord. of 11-8-1990) 
Sec. 22-2. - National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The county hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the Unified Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57, as its system of preparing for a responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the county to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Code 2000, § 22-2; Ord. No. 05-004, 10-4-2005) 
Secs. 22-3—22-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of man-made or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011 et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside the state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the state. 
State of emergency means the condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency in any part of the state is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by the state to supplement the efforts and available resources of the several localities and relief organizations in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Code 2000, § 22-31; Res. of 8-12-1991, § I) 
Sec. 22-24. - Office of the county emergency management director. 
(a) Established. There is established the county emergency management agency. The board of commissioners shall nominate for appointment by the governor a director of emergency management for the entire county. 
(b) Duties. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1) To represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2) To assist the county in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations.
(3) To develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency management plan for emergency functions set forth in section 22-23. Such plan will be in consonance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the City of Fitzgerald, the utilities commission, and the Ben Hill County School Board, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4) To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(5) To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices (e.g., financial, daily activities, etc.). 
(6) To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7) To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 22-32; Res. of 8-12-1991, § II) 
Sec. 22-25. - County emergency management agency. 
(a) The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments, and the emergency functions listed in section 22-23 are assigned as follows: 
Department/Agency and Functions 
Chairperson of board of commissioners 
Direction and control 
Sheriff's office 
Communications and warning 
Police services 
Evacuation 
Emergency management agency 
Public information 
State military support 
Training 
Preliminary damage assessment and reporting 
Public property assistance 
Attack preparedness 
Specific hazards 
Fire department 
Search, rescue and recovery 
Fire services 
Hazardous materials 
Radiological protection 
Public works 
Engineering 
Petroleum and solid fuel services 
Utilities 
School superintendent 
Transportation services 
Food services 
Health department 
Health and medical services 
Clerk's office 
Administrative services 
Resources management 
Department of family and children services 
Social services 
Shelter and temporary housing 
(b) Heads of departments listed in this section are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 2000, § 22-33; Res. of 8-12-1991, § III) 
Sec. 22-26. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency that may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the board of commissioners may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1) To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2) To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public. 
(3) To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4) To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency action as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 22-34; Res. of 8-12-1991, § IV) 
Sec. 22-27. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Code 2000, § 22-35; Res. of 8-12-1991, § V) 
Sec. 22-28. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 2000, § 22-36; Res. of 8-12-1991, § VI) 
Secs. 22-29—22-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE OF EMERGENCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-55—22-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION OF FORMALITIES 

Sec. 22-77. - Purpose. 
(a) The local governing authority of the county is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 38-3-27(b) and 38-3-28 to take actions necessary to provide for the health and safety of persons and property during periods of emergency or disaster, provided that such actions are not inconsistent with any orders, rules, or regulations promulgated by the governor or his designee. 
(b) The powers and functions exercised by the local governing authority necessary to conduct the business and affairs of the county during an emergency or disaster proclaimed as such by the appropriate state official may continue without regard to compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-54. 
(c) In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-4-63(6), certain formalities concerning public works contracts may be waived when necessitated by emergency. 
(d) The county board of commissioners believes that it is desirable to have legislation in place authorizing the board to waive certain formalities and procedures as necessary in case of emergency, natural disaster or the subsequent recovery period. 
(Code 2000, § 22-41; Ord. No. 02-004, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-78. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a) Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of county commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of county commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(b) Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of county commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of county commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1) The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
(2) Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3) Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statues or regulations.
(c) Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of county commissioners, or its designee, of an emergency or disaster, the board of county commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(d) Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of county commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of disaster or emergency, the board of county commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the board of county commissioners or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Code 2000, § 22-42; Ord. No. 02-004, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statue or regulation. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The subsequent recovery period shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the board of county commissioners. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations of a particular zoning district. 
(Code 2000, § 22-43; Ord. No. 02-004, 8-6-2002) 
Secs. 22-80—22-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 22-97. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of county commissioners and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Code 2000, § 22-51; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-98. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: 
(1) He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2) He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Code 2000, § 22-52; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-99. - Registration. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of county commissioners or such other person designated by the board of county commissioners at the county courthouse or such other place designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the board of county commissioners with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Code 2000, § 22-53; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-100. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees shall be set by ordinance by the board of county commissioners. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Code 2000, § 22-54; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-101. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 22-55; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-102. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance, no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Code 2000, § 22-56; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-103. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Code 2000, § 22-57; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-104. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The board of county commissioners hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee, acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 22-58; Ord. No. 02-006, 8-6-2002) 
Secs. 22-105—22-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES, AND HOUSING 

Sec. 22-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means the charging of prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services, or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the board of county commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 22-62; Ord. No. 02-005, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-123. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Code 2000, § 22-61; Ord. No. 02-005, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-124. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this division upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 22-63; Ord. No. 02-005, 8-6-2002) 
Secs. 22-125—22-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEW 

Sec. 22-142. - Authority to institute. 
(a) Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of county commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board of county commissioners, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b) All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c) The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Code 2000, § 22-71; Ord. No. 02-003, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal of any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, includes those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the board of county commissioners, also exempt regular employees or local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to division 3 of this article, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
(Code 2000, § 22-72; Ord. No. 02-003, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-144. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated areas of the county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Code 2000, § 22-73; Ord. No. 02-003, 8-6-2002) 
Sec. 22-145. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Code 2000, § 22-74; Ord. No. 02-003, 8-6-2002) 
Chapters 23—25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. (Back)
Sec. 26-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPES or CPES, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Cut is also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director means the director of environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 26-22. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by the EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennial appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 26-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement's piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by the EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by the EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has operational control of construction project plans and specification, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernable, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed developmental project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other material such that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Middle South Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication, "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1) Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or
(2) Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or
(3) Sodding, covering areas with a turf or perennial sod-forming grass.
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-131), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1) Surface mining, as the same is defined in the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968 (O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72 et seq.); 
(2) Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying;
(3) Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4) The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5) Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6) Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 26-22(c)(15)—(16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7) Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8) Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9) Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or finances in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10) Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11) Any public water system reservoir.
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-132), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution; control using best management practices. 
(a) General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b) Minimum requirements/best management practices. 
(1) Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f)). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2) A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f)), for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3) Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f)), for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4) The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5) The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c) Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2) Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum;
(3) Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented;
(5) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6) Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(7) Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8) Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9) To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basin, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10) Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11) Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property;
(12) Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13) Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14) Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15) There is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except: 
a. As provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section;
b. Where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
c. Where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8;
d. Where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; 
e. Or along any ephemeral stream.
1. As used in this subsection, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream:
(i) That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; 
(ii) That has the channel located above the groundwater table year round;
(iii) For which groundwater is not a source of water; and
(iv) For which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow.
2. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(i) No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
(ii) The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: stream crossings for water lines; or stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16) There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a. No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may think or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetation cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b. The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: stream crossings for water lines; or stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d) Additional provisions. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e) Exceptions. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-133), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-23. - Application process. 
(a) Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal of the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b) Application requirements. 
(1) No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county, without first obtaining a permit from the erosion and sedimentation control consultant to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2) The application for a permit shall be submitted to the erosion and sedimentation control consultant and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 26-22(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans and a land disturbance activity (LDA) permit. All applicants shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3) In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees dues from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4) Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 26-22(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, has been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. 
(5) If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6) The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(c) Plan requirements. 
(1) Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirement as contained in section 26-22(b) and (c), or through use of more stringent, alternate designs criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal for the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2) Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d) Permits. 
(1) Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 50 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2) No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 26-22(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3) Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4) If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5) The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6) The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-134), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a) The erosion and sediment control consultant will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b) The erosion and sedimentation control consultant shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c) No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-135), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a) Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b) Stop work orders. 
(1) For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2) For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3) All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4) When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c) Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 26-23(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d) Monetary compliance. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-136), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-26. - Education and certification. 
(a) Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b) For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site wherever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c) Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d) If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-137), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-27. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a) Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan to a hearing before the board of commissioners within 15 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b) Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-138), 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-28. - Liability. 
(a) Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b) The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c) No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1(26-139), 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 26-29—26-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 26-50. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the State of Georgia has in Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Code 2000, § 26-141; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 1, § A, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-51. - Findings of fact. 
(a) The flood hazard areas of the county, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b) These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Code 2000, § 26-142; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 1, § B, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-52. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water and erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 2000, § 26-143; Ord. No. 99-7, § C, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-53. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(5) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6) Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and
(7) Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Code 2000, § 26-144; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 1, § D, 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 26-54—26-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-65. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 26-145; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § A, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-66. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a) The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 6, 1996, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b) Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. See the map attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived as exhibit A for areas of special flood hazard as shown thereon. The map referenced in this subsection is available in the office of the county clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 26-146; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § B, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-67. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 2000, § 26-147; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § C, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-68. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 26-148; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § D, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-69. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and other applicable regulations conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 2000, § 26-149; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § E, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-70. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Code 2000, § 26-150; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § F, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-71. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 26-151; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § G, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-72. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00, or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2000, § 26-152; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 2, § H, 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 26-73—26-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-103. - Designation of administrator. 
The county building inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 26-153; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 3, § A, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-104. - Permit procedures. 
(a) Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by the county prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b) Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Application stage. 
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c. Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 26-125(2); 
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2) Construction stage. 
a. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the building inspector as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b. Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building inspector shall review the certification data submitted in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Code 2000, § 26-154; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 3, § B, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-105. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1) Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2) Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-66, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of this division. 
(4) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 26-104(b). 
(5) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean seal level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 26-104(b). 
(6) When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 26-104(b)(1)c, 26-125(2), and 26-127(2). 
(7) Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(8) For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9) Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10) Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office and have it be open for public inspection. 
(Code 2000, § 26-155; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 3, § C, 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 26-106—26-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-124. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1) New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2) New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3) New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4) Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1. Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b. So as to not violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5) All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(9) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(10) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 2000, § 26-156; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 4, § A, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-125. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1) New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-124(4). 
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in the A1-30, AE, or AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this article and in section 26-105(6). 
(3) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a. All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on:
1. Individual lots or parcels;
2. In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions;
3. In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or
4. On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b. Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2. The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see section 26-124(6)). 
d. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
1. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
2. The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a and c of this section. 
(4) Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-66 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity of floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a. Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b. Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 26-157; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 4, § B, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-126. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways (A zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-66, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not be delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-66, then the building inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 26-125. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2) No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3) In special flood hazard areas without the base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-124. The building inspector shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 2000, § 26-158; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 4, § C, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-127. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-66 may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-124(4). 
(2) New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designated to be watertight to the specified firm flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this article and as required in section 26-104(b)(1)c and (2). 
(3) Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 2000, § 26-159; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 4, § D, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-128. - Standards for subdivisions. 
The following standards for subdivisions shall apply: 
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Code 2000, § 26-160; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 4, § E, 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 26-129—26-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 26-155. - Procedures. 
(a) The board of commissioners shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b) The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of commissioners may appeal such decision to the superior court as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e) Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g) In reviewing such requests, the board of commissioners shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this section and other sections of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 26-161; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 5(A)—(G), 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 26-156. - Conditions. 
(a) A variance shall be issued only when there is:
(1) A finding of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b) The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d) The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e) Upon consideration of the factors listed in this division and the purposes of this article, the board of commissioners may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 26-162; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 5(H), 12-21-1999) 
Secs. 26-157—26-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 26-174. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 26-66. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor at the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and fillings; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. Substantial improvement, for the purposes of this definition, is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been preidentified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Code 2000, § 26-163; Ord. No. 99-7, art. 6, 12-21-1999) 
Chapters 27—29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY BOARD OF HEALTH RULES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. (Back)
Sec. 30-20. - Implementation, enforcement. 
The duty of implementation and enforcement of these regulations rest with the county board of commissioners and by virtue of this article is hereby expressly delegated to the county board of health who is hereby charged with promulgation of sufficient procedures for ensuring compliance with these rules and regulations by the citizens of the county. The county board of health is directed to implement procedures which will ensure that the citizens of the county will receive all procedural rights to which they are entitled under the laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 30-32; Ord. No. 95-1, § II, 2-7-1995; Ord. of 8-5-2008, § II) 
Sec. 30-21. - Violations; penalty. 
Any violation of the rules and regulations referenced in section 30-19 shall be a violation of this article and shall be a misdemeanor offense. Any violator shall be subject to the imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days. Any failure of payment of inspection fees listed within the fee schedule adopted by county board of health and approved the county board of commissioners within 60 days of first notice may result in suspension of permit. 
(Code 2000, § 30-33; Ord. No. 95-1, § III, 2-7-1995; Ord. of 8-5-2008, § III) 
Sec. 30-22. - Court jurisdiction. 
(a) The magistrate's court of the county shall have jurisdiction over violators of this article and all procedures for enforcement of such article shall be as provided in article 4, chapter 10 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-4). Complaints of violation of any provision of this article shall be brought before the magistrate's court by a designated representative of county board of health and shall be prosecuted through that court. 
(b) Under the authority of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, title 31, chapter 3-4-(6) (O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-4—31-3-6), the board of health and the board of commissioners do hereby declare that fees shall be established and collected for body art establishments and body art artists in the county. The fee will be set by ordinance by the board of county commissioners. This fee will include the permit for one facility and the one artist/operator. Additional artist permits for each additional artist will be set by ordinance by the board of county commissioners. The fees will include plan reviews and all routine compliance inspections for an establishment. Fees for body art establishments and body art artists shall be attached to the minutes of the board and made available for public review. 
(c) All money collected shall be handled in accordance with acceptable accounting procedures and deposited in the board of health general fund account of the county and used in accordance with the state law. 
(Code 2000, § 30-34; Ord. No. 95-1, § IV, 2-7-1995; Ord. of 8-5-2008, § IV) 
Secs. 30-23—30-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR WATER USE 

Sec. 30-48. - Title. 
This article shall be known as "Outdoor Water Use for Ben Hill County." 
(Code 2000, § 30-40; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the house number (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. The term "even-numbered addresses" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. The term "odd-numbered address" means a house ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Code 2000, § 30-41; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-50. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the state environmental protection division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Code 2000, § 30-42; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-51. - Outdoor water schedule use during non-drought periods. 
Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1) For odd-numbered addresses, outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2) For even-numbered addresses, outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(Code 2000, § 30-43; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-52. - Outdoors water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a) Drought declarations. The director of the environmental protection division is authorized to make drought declarations. 
(b) Declared drought conditions. During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted by the state department of natural resources environmental division shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c) Declared drought response level one. During level one drought conditions, outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1) Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays.
(2) Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays.
(3) Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(d) Declared drought response level two. During level two drought conditions, outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1) Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays.
(2) Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3) The following uses are prohibited:
a. Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing.
b. Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(e) Declared drought response level three. During level three drought conditions, outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1) The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday.
(2) The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday.
(3) The following uses are prohibited:
a. Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing.
b. Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c. Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
d. Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts.
e. Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection.
f. Noncommercial fundraisers, such as car washes.
g. Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f) Declared drought response level four. During level four drought conditions, no outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted by the state department of natural resources environmental division, or as the environmental protection division may order. 
(Code 2000, § 30-44; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-53. - Exemptions. 
(a) This article shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses:
(1) Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2) Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances.
(b) The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1) Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2) Irrigation of personal food gardens.
(c) Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following:
(1) Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2) For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d) The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1) Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2) Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
(3) Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
(4) Irrigation of greens.
(e) The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this article: 
(1) Professional certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2) Irrigation contractors: during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3) Sod producers.
(4) Ornamental growers.
(5) Fruit and vegetable growers.
(6) Retail garden centers.
(7) Hydroseeding.
(8) Power-washing.
(9) Construction sites.
(10) Producers of food and fiber.
(11) Car washes.
(12) Other activities essential to daily business.
(13) Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf.
(Code 2000, § 30-45; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 30-54. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, business, corporation or any entity to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b) Any person, firm, organization, business, corporation or any entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be issued a warning for the first offense. The second offense as well as any subsequent offenses shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days in the county jail or both. Ordinance violations may be tried upon citation with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusation, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60. Citations shall be issued by the county board of commissioners or its designee. Service upon corporations, partnerships or other entities or organizations shall be effective by serving any managing agent located in the county, or by serving the registered agent, or any officer or partner of the corporation, partnership or organization or entity. The provisions of this article may also be enforced through the use of other remedies such as injunction for relief as provided by the laws of the state. 
(c) Whenever a corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity shall violate any of the provisions of this article, such violations shall be deemed to be also that of the individual directors, officers or agents of such corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity who shall have authorized, ordered, or done any of the acts constituting in a whole or in part such violation. In such cases, service shall also be made upon the individual director, officer or other agent accused of authorizing, ordering or doing the acts constituting in whole or in part violations of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 30-46; Ord. No. 04-04, 9-7-2004) 
Secs. 30-55—30-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRICTIONS ON OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 30-82. - Title. 
This article shall be known as "Ben Hill County, Georgia's Outdoor Landscape Watering Ordinance." 
(Code 2000, § 30-50; Ord. No. 10-02, § 1(30-50), 12-7-2007) 
Sec. 30-83. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area of the county, may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1) Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2) Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3) Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4) Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5) Watering personal food gardens;
(6) Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7) Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8) Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9) Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10) Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11) Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12) Installation, maintenance, or calibration or irrigation systems; or
(13) Hydroseeding.
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1(30-51), 12-7-2007) 
Sec. 30-84. - Enforcement. 
(a) No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b) The board of commissioners or county manager shall authorize the person or department to be the enforcement authority for this article. The board of commissioners or county manager may also authorize other departments, as may be deemed necessary, to support enforcement. 
(c) Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this article may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 1(30-52), 12-7-2007) 
Chapters 31—33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation or buildings or structures that imperil health, safety or morals, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; authority to demolish structures where drug crimes are committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; county or municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry or other farm products. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of a municipality, county or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer who is authorized by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other material present and accumulated that create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
(Code 2000, § 26-31; Ord. No. 89-1, § 1, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-20. - Determination of nuisances. 
(a) It is found and declared that in the unincorporated area of the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings, buildings or structures that are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the county; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(b) It is found and declared that in the unincorporated area of the county there is in existence conditions or use of real estate that renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the county, and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or cessation of such use that renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(c) It is found and declared that there exists within the unincorporated area of the county property upon which there is an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions that create a public health hazard or general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity of such real estate. 
(Code 2000, § 26-32; Ord. No. 89-1, § 2, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-21. - Duty of owner. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
Sec. 34-22. - Dwellings, buildings, structures and lots as nuisances. 
All dwellings, buildings, structures or lots of the character described in section 34-20 are declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, closed, vacated, abated, demolished or cleared as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
(Code 2000, § 26-33; Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 5-2-1989) 
Secs. 34-23—34-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC OFFICER 

Sec. 34-48. - Appointment. 
The board of commissioners shall designate or appoint a public officer to exercise the powers prescribed in and set forth by this article, and to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 26-56; Ord. No. 89-1, § 4, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-49. - Powers. 
The public officer designated or appointed according to section 34-48 is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in this article: 
(1) To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures or lots in the county are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use; 
(2) To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; however, such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Code 2000, § 26-57; Ord. No. 89-1, § 7, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-50. - Duties. 
(a) Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the unincorporated area of the county charging that any dwelling, building, structure or lot is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, unit, structure, property, or lot. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, property, or lot is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a magistrate court of the county, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. 
(b) The owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the magistrate court of the county. 
(c) If after such notice and hearing the magistrate court determines that the dwelling, building, structure or lot under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon interested parties that have answered the complaint of appeared at the hearing an order as follows: 
(1) To repair, alter or improve the dwelling, building, structure or lot if the same can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, structure or lot, and to require the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, structure or lot so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business uses, or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure or lot as a human habitation; or, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2) If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, to require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
The court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost" in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, or lot without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factored in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43 ch. 39A (O.C.G.A § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the county; 
(d) In no event, however, shall the removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, structure, or lot be required except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement exceeds half the value of such dwelling, building or structure when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(e) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or lot to be repaired, altered or improved, cleared, or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure, or lot a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f) If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g) The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h) The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal, abatement, demolition, clearing of dwellings, buildings, structures or lots in the following manner: 
(1) The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county within 30 days after the perfection of the lien a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due, and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2) Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county. 
(3) Should any amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (h)(2) of this section, or should the owner or parties at interest fail to pay within 30 days after the perfection of the lien a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due, as provided in subsection (h)(1) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures or clearing of lots in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 26-58; Ord. No. 89-1, § 5, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-51. - Determination that dwelling, building, structure or lot is unfit. 
The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure or lot is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling, building, structure or lot that are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure or lot; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or other residents of the county. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1) Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities.
(2) Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
(3) Dilapidation.
(4) Disrepair.
(5) Structural defects.
(6) Uncleanliness.
(7) Accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary and unsafe conditions.
A public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or a report from a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Code 2000, § 26-59; Ord. No. 89-1, § 6, 5-2-1989) 
Sec. 34-52. - Service of complaints or orders. 
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article in all cases shall be served in a manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(Code 2000, § 26-60; Ord. No. 89-1, § 8, 5-2-1989) 
Secs. 34-53—34-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOUD, DISTURBING, OR UNNECESSARY NOISES 

Sec. 34-78. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purposes, but does not necessarily mean devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas, streets or parks. 
Public roads means all public highways, streets and roads located within the unincorporated area of the county, and also means any public property owned by the county, either individually or jointly with the City of Fitzgerald. 
(Code 2000, § 26-171; Ord. No. 00-2, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 34-79. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud or boisterous noise or disturbance that would annoy a reasonable person near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or building which either annoys, disturbs, injuries or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 26-172; Ord. No. 00-2, § 2, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 34-80. - Violations. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1) Radios, phonographs, and musical instruments. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, jukebox or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of a reasonable person or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, phonograph, jukebox, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(2) Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of a reasonable person in the vicinity. This section shall not apply to horses, livestock, poultry or other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with county zoning regulations or ordinances. 
(3) Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the unincorporated area of the county, except as a danger warning; and the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(4) Streets adjacent to schools, courts, churches, and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which would disturb or unduly annoy a reasonable person in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court street. 
(5) Motorcycles, go-carts, and other motor vehicles. The operation of a motorcycle, motorized scooter, go-cart, all-terrain vehicle or other motorized vehicle in a manner which creates excessive noise, including the continuous riding of any such vehicle past, around or near an inhabited dwelling place so as to disturb or unduly annoy a reasonable person. 
(Code 2000, § 26-173; Ord. No. 00-2, § 3, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 34-81. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days in prison or both as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60. Jurisdiction for violations of this article shall be within the magistrate court of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 26-174; Ord. No. 00-2, § 4, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 34-82. - Prosecution for violations. 
Prosecution for violations of this article shall be upon citation as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and said citation shall be tried in the magistrate court without a prosecuting attorney for each citation issued and the prosecution thereof shall conform to the requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. The chief magistrate of the county is further authorized to establish a cash bond for the personal appearance in court of any person charged with the violation of this article pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63.1. 
(Code 2000, § 26-175; Ord. No. 00-2, § 5, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 34-83. - Power to enforce this article. 
The sheriff, any deputy, and the code enforcement officer of the county shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Secs. 34-84—34-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNK 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Junk or metal dealers records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq.; control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq.; authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars or trespassing personal property, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. (Back)
Sec. 34-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inoperable condition means a condition that prevents its use for the purpose for which it is originally manufactured. 
Junk means any automobile, motor vehicle, mechanized equipment, machinery, appliance, scrap metal or other scrap material that has been located on the property for a period of 30 days or longer in an inoperable condition. 
(Code 2000, § 26-91; Ord. No. 88-1, § 1, 6-14-1988) 
Sec. 34-111. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the county by eliminating the storage or accumulation of junk that would otherwise be harmful and dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the county and would further constitute an unsightly nuisance. 
(Code 2000, § 26-92; Ord. No. 88-1, § 5, 6-14-1988) 
Sec. 34-112. - Repair, removal. 
Upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official, the owner or person in possession of any premises upon which is located any junk shall, within 30 days: 
(1) Repair such junk and place it in operable condition;
(2) Cause such junk to be removed from the premises and disposed of in a manner so as not to constitute a violation of any ordinances of the county, and so as not to constitute a nuisance; or 
(3) Submit to the building official a plan satisfactory to that official for placing such junk in an operable condition within a time deemed by the building official to be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Code 2000, § 26-93; Ord. No. 88-1, § 2, 6-14-1988) 
Sec. 34-113. - Penalty. 
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of section 34-112 shall be tried in the magistrate's court of the county and upon conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 2000, § 26-94; Ord. No. 88-1, § 3, 6-14-1988) 
Sec. 34-114. - Abatement of nuisance by county. 
Any junk remaining on premises in violation of the terms of this article after the procedures prescribed in this article have been followed is declared to be harmful and dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare and is declared to be a nuisance. The abatement of such junk shall be accomplished by the building official, and the cost of removal shall be assessed against the owner or person in possession of the premises; and the clerk of the board of commissioners shall be authorized and directed to issue an execution against the owner or person in possession of the premises for the amount expended in the removal of the junk. In furtherance of the authority and purposes contained in this article, the board of commissioners shall have authority to contract with private individuals and firms for the removal of such junk if it remains on the premises in violation of the terms of this article after the procedures prescribed in this article have been followed. 
(Code 2000, § 26-95; Ord. No. 88-1, § 4, 6-14-1988) 
Sec. 34-115. - Exceptions for junkyards. 
Nothing contained within this article shall be deemed to apply to any motor vehicle or parts thereof that shall be located within the confines of any junkyard complying with the laws of the state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Code 2000, § 26-96; Ord. No. 88-1, § 6, 6-14-1988) 
Chapters 35—37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1, et seq.; crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - What court. 
Trial and sentencing of violations of county ordinances shall be held in the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-2, 15-10-60. 
Sec. 38-2. - Who presides. 
Cases against offenders for violations of the ordinances of the county shall be tried by the chief magistrate judge or appointed deputy magistrate. It shall be the duty of the deputy clerk, to be appointed by the chief magistrate judge, to handle all administrative matters pertaining to violations of such ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
Sec. 38-4. - Filing, docketing and disposition of charges. 
It shall be the duty of the county deputies arresting offenders against the county's ordinances to return a copy of the charges to the magistrate clerk who shall docket the case, be present at the opening of the magistrate court, call the case for trial after notifying the deputy magistrate that the case has been entered, and after the trial, shall enter up the judgment of the court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
Sec. 38-5. - Use of citations and prosecution upon citation. 
Violations of the ordinances of the county will be tried upon citation by the arresting deputy. Prosecutions for violations of ordinances upon citations shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of the citation by the deputy. A copy of the citation shall be served upon the accused and the original shall promptly be filed with the court. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62, 15-10-63. 
Sec. 38-6. - Form of citation. 
Each citation shall identify the offense which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and date of service, and shall be signed by the deputy who completes and serves it. Further, the citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. The citation shall indicate the telephone number the accused may utilize to ascertain the fine amount. In lieu of appearance at trial, the citation shall state that the accused may either mail the fine amount, by money order or cashier's check, to a specified address or appear in person at a specified address to tender the fine amount. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63. 
Sec. 38-7. - Arrests. 
(a) No person shall be arrested prior to the time of trial, except for the offenses of public drunkenness or disorderly conduct or as authorized by ordinance of a state authority; provided, however, that the accused may be arrested prior to the time of trial for the violation of the county ordinance related to loitering; and provided further, that any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the deputy magistrate and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(b) Execution may issue immediately upon any fine imposed by the court and not immediately paid. 
(c) The county sheriff shall receive and house all persons sentenced to confinement for contempt or arrested or sentenced to confinement for violation of ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-61, 15-10-64. 
Sec. 38-8. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds/cash bonds. 
(a) The chief magistrate may, by written order, establish a schedule of cash bonds for the personal appearance in court of any person charged with a violation of an ordinance. The chief magistrate shall designate the officer or officers authorized to accept cash bonds pursuant to the schedule of bonds published by the court. In no event shall any officer or agent who is authorized to issue citations be authorized to accept a cash bond at the time of or in conjunction with the issuance of any citation. The officer accepting a cash bond shall issue a receipt for the bond to the person charged with the violation. 
(b) Any person who is accused by citation but has not been arrested may, but shall not be required to, give a cash bond for his personal appearance in court for trial. If a person who has given a cash bond fails to appear for trial, the failure to appear shall be deemed to constitute a guilty plea and such cash bond shall be forfeited upon the call of the case for trial. It shall not be necessary for the county to take any further action to forfeit the cash bond. Forfeiture of a cash bond shall be deemed to constitute imposition and payment of a fine and shall be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. The court may, however, in any case enter an order pursuant to which bond forfeiture shall not be deemed to constitute imposition of a sentence and subsequent prosecution shall not be barred; and in any such case the amount of the bond forfeited shall be credited against any fine subsequently imposed. 
(c) It shall be the duty of the clerk of the magistrate court to furnish the officers authorized under the order with a book of blank receipts consecutively numbered in triplicate and readily distinguishable and identifiable. The receipts shall be completed by the officers when accepting a cash bond so as to show the name of the person cited or arrested the date of citation or arrest, nature of the offense, amount of cash bond given, and the name of the receiving officer. The receiving officer shall deliver a copy of the receipt to the person cited or arrested at the time the cash bond is given and shall file the original together with the cash bond with the clerk of the magistrate court not later than the next succeeding business day following the date of issuance of the receipt. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, § 2, 2-13-2007) 
State law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63.1. 
Secs. 38-9—38-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); possession of open container of alcoholic beverage while operating vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253; option to treat violation of Uniform Rules of the Road as state or local offense, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-376; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. (Back)
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-34. - Violation and penalty. 
Any violation of any of the sections of this article shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, intro. ¶) 
Sec. 38-35. - Reckless conduct causing harm to or endangering the bodily safety of another; conduct by HIV infected persons; assault by HIV infected persons or hepatitis infected persons. 
(a) Any term used in this section and defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-22-9.1 shall have the meaning provided for such term in O.C.G.A. § 31-22-9.1. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to cause bodily harm to or endanger the bodily safety of another person by consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of the other person and the disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-9)) 
Sec. 38-36. - Public indecency. 
(a) A person commits the offense of public indecency when he performs any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1) An act of sexual intercourse;
(2) A lewd exposure of the sexual organs;
(3) A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; or
(4) A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person.
(b) For the purposes of this section only, the term "public place" shall include jails and penal and correctional institutions of the state and its political subdivisions. 
(c) This section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules, and regulations of state and local authorities or agencies and local ordinances prohibiting such activities which are more restrictive than this section. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-10)) 
Sec. 38-37. - Prostitution. 
(a) A person commits the offense of prostitution when he performs or offers or consents to perform a sexual act, including but not limited to sexual intercourse or sodomy, for money or other items of value. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-11)) 
Sec. 38-38. - Testing for sexually transmitted diseases required. 
(a) Any term used in this section and defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-22-9.1 shall have the meaning provided for such term in O.C.G.A. § 31-22-9.1. 
(b) Upon a verdict or plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere to the offense of pandering, the court in which that verdict is returned or plea entered shall as a condition of probation or a suspended sentence require the defendant in such case to submit to testing for sexually transmitted diseases within 45 days following the date of the verdict or plea and to consent to release of the test results to the defendant's spouse if the defendant is married; provided, however, that a defendant who is not a resident of the state shall, upon a verdict or plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere, be ordered by the court to undergo immediate testing for sexually transmitted diseases and shall remain in the custody of the court until such testing is completed. The clerk of the court, in the case of a defendant who is a resident of the state, shall mail, within three days following the date of that verdict or plea, a copy of that verdict or plea to the department of human resources. The tests for sexually transmitted diseases required under this subsection shall be limited to the eight most common sexually transmitted diseases as determined by the department of human resources. 
(c) The department of human resources, within 30 days following the notification under subsection (b) of this section, shall arrange for the tests for the person required to submit thereto. Such person shall bear the costs of such tests. 
(d) Any person required under this section to submit to testing for sexually transmitted diseases who fails or refuses to submit to the tests arranged pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be subject to such measures deemed necessary by the court in which the verdict was returned or plea entered to require voluntary submission to the tests. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-12)) 
Sec. 38-39. - Solicitation of sodomy. 
(a) A person commits the offense of solicitation of sodomy when he solicits another to perform or submit to an act of sodomy. 
(b) This section does not apply where a person convicted of solicitation of sodomy when such offense involves the solicitation of a person under the age of 18 years to perform or submit to an act of sodomy for money. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-13)) 
Sec. 38-40. - Masturbation for hire. 
(a) A person, including a masseur or masseuse, commits the offense of masturbation for hire when he erotically stimulates the genital organs of another, whether resulting in orgasm or not, by manual or other bodily contact exclusive of sexual intercourse or by instrumental manipulation for money or the substantial equivalent thereof. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-14)) 
Sec. 38-41. - Giving massages in place used for lewdness, prostitution, assignations, or masturbation for hire. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Masseur means a male who practices massage or physiotherapy, or both. 
Masseuse means a female who practices massage or physiotherapy, or both. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any masseur or masseuse to massage any person in any building, structure, or place used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation, prostitution, or masturbation for hire. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-15)) 
Sec. 38-42. - Criminal trespass. 
(a) A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is $500.00 or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(b) A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he knowingly and without authority:
(1) Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2) Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3) Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(c) For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor who is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car. aircraft, or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(d) A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he intentionally defaces, mutilates, or defiles any grave marker, monument, or memorial to one or more deceased persons who served in the military service of the state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof, or a monument, plaque, marker, or memorial which is dedicated to, honors, or recounts the military service of any past or present military personnel of the state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof if such grave marker, monument, memorial, plaque, or marker is privately owned or located on land which is privately owned. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-16)) 
Sec. 38-43. - Interference with government property. 
(a) A person commits the offense of interference with government property when he forcibly interferes with or obstructs the passage into or from government property and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-17)) 
Sec. 38-44. - Damaging, injuring, or interfering with property or public utility companies, municipalities, or political subdivisions. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality, or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality, or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold, or distributed by the company, municipality, or political subdivision. 
(b) Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section and the person who with knowledge of such violation receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(c) This section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules, and regulations of state or local authorities or agencies and local ordinances prohibiting such activities which are more restrictive than this section. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-18)) 
Sec. 38-45. - Injuring, tearing down, or destroying mailboxes; injuring, defacing, or destroying mail. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to injure, tear down, or destroy any mailbox or receptacle intended or used for the receipt or delivery of mail or willfully or maliciously to injure, deface, or destroy any mail deposited therein. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-19)) 
Sec. 38-46. - Burning of woodlands, brush, fields, or other lands; destruction of or damage to material or device used in detection or suppression of wildfires. 
(a) It shall be unlawful:
(1) To start, cause, or procure another to start a fire in any woodlands, brush, field, or any other lands not one's own or leased and without the permission of the owner; 
(2) To burn any brush, field, forest land, campfire, or debris, whether on one's own land or the lands of another, without taking the necessary precautions before, during, and after the fire to prevent the escape of such fire onto the lands of another. The escape of such fire shall be prima-facie evidence that necessary precautions were not taken; 
(3) For any person to cause a fire by discarding any lighted cigarette, cigar, debris, or any other flaming or smoldering material that may cause a forest fire; or 
(4) To destroy or damage any material or device used in the detection or suppression of wildfires. 
(b) This section shall not apply to fire resulting from the operation of transportation machinery or equipment used in its normal or accustomed manner. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-20)) 
Sec. 38-47. - Littering public or private property or waters. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the state or any waters in the state, unless: 
(1) The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2) The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3) The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(c) In addition to the punishment provided in subsection (b) of this section:
(1) In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(2) In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d) The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-21)) 
Sec. 38-48. - Littering public or private property or waters; enforcing personnel. 
(a) Any county, municipality, or law enforcement agency thereof of the state which is empowered to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances may, in its discretion, appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, and has not previously been convicted of a felony to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances within the county or municipality in which the appointing agency exercises jurisdiction. Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the appointing authority. Any person appointed and sworn pursuant to this subsection shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances in the same manner as any employee or law enforcement officer of the state or any county or municipality of the state subject to the limitations provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b) No person appointed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be deemed a peace officer under the laws of the state or: 
(1) Be deemed to be an employee of or receive any compensation from the state, county, municipality, or appointing law enforcement agency; 
(2) Be required to complete any training or be certified pursuant to the requirements of chapter 8 of title 35 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.); 
(3) Have the power or duty to enforce any other traffic or criminal laws of the state, county, or municipality; 
(4) Have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the littering laws; or 
(5) Be entitled to any indemnification from the state, county, or municipality for any injury or property damage sustained by such person as a result of attempting to enforce the littering laws of the state or any local government. 
(c) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, neither the state nor any county, municipality or other political subdivision of the state or any department, agency, board, or officer of the state shall be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances. 
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, resist, impede, or interfere with any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of this section or local littering ordinances or to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against such person as a reprisal for any act or omission of such person. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-22)) 
Sec. 38-49. - Designation of containers for household garbage; misuse or vandalization of container. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household garbage means animal, vegetable, and fruit refuse matter and other refuse matter ordinarily generated as byproducts of a household or restaurant, such as tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
(b) The governing authority of each county of the state which provides containers for the dumping of trash or garbage therein shall be authorized to designate any or all such containers as being suitable for the dumping therein of household garbage only. If a container is clearly marked "household garbage only," it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage. 
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers provided by any county for the dumping of trash or garbage. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-23)) 
Sec. 38-50. - Interference with officers. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to hinder or obstruct any explosive ordnance technician, law enforcement officer, fire official, emergency management official, animal trained to detect destructive devices, or any robot or mechanical device designed or utilized by a law enforcement officer, fire official, or emergency management official of the state or of the United States in the detection, disarming, or destruction of a destructive device. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-24)) 
Sec. 38-51. - Theft by taking. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by taking when he unlawfully takes or, being in lawful possession thereof, unlawfully appropriates any property of another with the intention of depriving him of the property, regardless of the manner in which the property is taken or appropriated. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-25)) 
Sec. 38-52. - Theft by deception. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by deception when he obtains property by any deceitful means or artful practice with the intention of depriving the owner of the property. 
(b) A person deceives if he intentionally:
(1) Creates or confirms another's impression of an existing fact or past event which is false and which the accused knows or believes to be false; 
(2) Fails to correct a false impression of an existing fact or past event which he has previously created or confirmed; 
(3) Prevents another from acquiring information pertinent to the disposition of the property involved; 
(4) Sells or otherwise transfers or encumbers property intentionally failing to disclose a substantial and valid known lien, adverse claim, or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property, whether such impediment is or is not a matter of official record; or 
(5) Promises performance of services which he does not intend to perform or knows will not be performed. Evidence of failure to perform standing alone shall not be sufficient to authorize a conviction under this subsection. 
(c) The terms "deceitful means" and "artful practice" do not, however, include falsity as to matters having no pecuniary significance, or exaggeration by statements unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-26)) 
Sec. 38-53. - Theft by conversion. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by conversion when, having lawfully obtained funds or other property of another including, but not limited to, leased or rented personal property, under an agreement or other known legal obligation to make a specified application of such funds or a specified disposition of such property, he knowingly converts the funds or property to his own use in violation of the agreement or legal obligation. This section applies whether the application or disposition is to be made from the funds or property of another or from the accused's own funds or property in equivalent amounts when the agreement contemplates that the accused may deal with the funds or property of another as his own. 
(b) When, under subsection (a) of this section, an officer or employee of a government or of a financial institution fails to pay on an account, upon lawful demand, from the funds or property of another held by him, he is presumed to have intended to convert the funds or property to his own use. 
(c) Personal property.
(1) As used in this subsection (c), the term "personal property" means personal property having a replacement cost value greater than $100.00, excluding any late fees and penalties, and includes heavy equipment as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-731(2) and tractors and farm equipment primarily designed for use in agriculture. 
(2) Any person having any personal property in such person's possession or under such person's control by virtue of a lease or rental agreement who fails to return the personal property within five days, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays excluded, after a letter demanding return of the personal property has been mailed to such person by certified or registered mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, at such person's last known address by the owner of the personal property or by the owner's agent shall be presumed to have knowingly converted such personal property to such person's own use in violation of such lease or agreement. 
(3) In the event that any personal property is not returned as provided for in the lease or rental agreement and the court orders the lessor or renter to pay replacement costs, replacement costs shall include but not be limited to: 
a. The market value of the personal property. The market value shall be established by the owner of the property by providing from a supplier of such or reasonably similar personal property a current quotation of the value of the personal property which is of like quality, make, and model of the personal property being replaced. The value to be awarded shall be the higher of: 
1. The value on the date when the conversion occurred; or
2. The value on the date of the trial;
b. All rental charges from the date the rental agreement was executed until the date of the trial or the date that the property was recovered, if recovered; and 
c. Interest on the unpaid balance each month at the current legal rate from the date the court orders the lessor or renter to pay replacement costs until the date the judgment is satisfied in full. 
(4) If as a part of the order of the court the lessor or renter is placed on probation, supervision of said probation shall not be terminated until all replacement costs, fees, charges, penalties, interest, and other charges are paid in full. All payments relative to this section shall be made to the appropriate court of jurisdiction and the court shall make distribution to the owner within 30 days of receipt thereof. 
(5) In the event that the owner incurs any expenses in the process of locating a lessor or renter who did not return any personal property according to the lease or rental agreement, the court shall provide that the lessor or renter reimburse the owner for those expenses which may include, but not be limited to, credit reports, private detective fees, investigation fees, fees charged by a law enforcement agency for such services as police reports, background checks, fees involved with swearing out a warrant for incarceration, and any other bona fide expenses. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-27)) 
Sec. 38-54. - Theft of services. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft of services when by deception and with the intent to avoid payment he knowingly obtains services, accommodations, entertainment, or the use of personal property which is available only for compensation. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-28)) 
Sec. 38-55. - Theft of lost or mislaid property. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft of lost or mislaid property when he comes into control of property that he knows or learns to have been lost or mislaid and appropriates the property to his own use without first taking reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-29)) 
Sec. 38-56. - Theft by receiving stolen property. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by receiving stolen property when he receives, disposes of, or retains stolen property which he knows or should know was stolen unless the property is received, disposed of, or retained with intent to restore it to the owner. The term "receiving" means acquiring possession or control or lending on the security of the property. 
(b) In any prosecution under this section it shall not be necessary to show a conviction of the principal thief. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-30)) 
Sec. 38-57. - Theft by bringing stolen property into the state. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by bringing stolen property into the state when he brings into the state any property which he knows or should know has been stolen in another state. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-31)) 
Sec. 38-58. - Exceptions for violation of sections 38-51 through 38-57. 
(a) The penalties of provided for in sections 38-51 through 38-57 do not apply in certain instances and in those case, the matter will be transferred to the appropriate court. 
(b) Where a violation involves the theft of a growing or otherwise unharvested commercial agricultural product which is being grown or produced as a crop, such offense shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than the maximum fine otherwise authorized by law. This minimum fine shall not in any such case be subject to suspension, stay, or probation. This minimum fine shall not be required in any case in which a sentence of confinement is imposed and such sentence of confinement is not suspended, stayed, or probated; but this subsection shall not prohibit imposition of any otherwise authorized fine in such a case. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-32)) 
Sec. 38-59. - Theft by shoplifting. 
(a) A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting when he alone or in concert with another person, with the intent of appropriating merchandise to his own use without paying for the same or to deprive the owner of possession thereof or of the value thereof, in whole or in part, does any of the following: 
(1) Conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment;
(2) Alters the price tag or other price marking on goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment; 
(3) Transfers the goods or merchandise of any store or retail establishment from one container to another; 
(4) Interchanges the label or price tag from one item of merchandise with a label or price tag for another item of merchandise; or 
(5) Wrongfully causes the amount paid to be less than the merchant's stated price for the merchandise. 
(b) Value. The property which was the subject of the theft must be $300.00 or less in value; provided, however, that in all cases involving theft by shoplifting, the term "value" means the actual retail price of the property at the time and place of the offense. The unaltered price tag or other marking on property, or duly identified photographs thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of value and ownership of the property. 
(c) Subsection (b) of this section shall in no way affect the authority of a sentencing judge to provide for a sentence to be served on weekends or during the nonworking hours of the defendant as provided in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3, relative to punishment for misdemeanors. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. In addition to or in lieu of any fine which might be imposed, the defendant may be punished by imprisonment for not less than 30 days or confinement in a "special alternative incarceration-probation boot camp," probation detention center, diversion center, or other community correctional facility of the department of corrections for a period not to exceed 30 days or shall be sentenced to monitored house arrest for a period not to exceed 30 days and, in addition to either such types of confinement, may be required to undergo psychological evaluation and treatment to be paid for by the defendant; and such sentence of imprisonment or confinement shall not be suspended, probated, deferred, or withheld. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-33)) 
Sec. 38-60. - Livestock theft. 
(a) A person commits the offense of livestock theft when he unlawfully takes or, being in lawful possession thereof, unlawfully appropriates any livestock of another with the intention of depriving the owner of such livestock. 
(b) For the purposes of this section, the term "livestock" means horses, cattle, swine, sheep, ratites, goats, rabbits, and any domestic animal produced as food for human consumption. 
(c) The fair market value of the livestock taken or appropriated must be $100.00 or less.
(d) For the purposes of this section, if any livestock is killed or mutilated and a portion thereof taken, the value of the whole animal while alive or his entire carcass, whichever is greater, shall be considered for the purpose of distinguishing between a misdemeanor offense and a felony offense. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-34)) 
Sec. 38-61. - Removal or abandonment of shopping carts; posting of Code section in stores and markets. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Shopping cart means those pushcarts of the type which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores, or other merchant stores or markets for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and incidentally from the store to a place outside the store. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the premises, posted as provided in subsection (d) of this section, of the owner of such shopping cart without the consent, given at the time of such removal, of the owner or of his agent, servant, or employee. For the purpose of this section, the premises shall include all the parking area set aside by the owner or on behalf of the owner for the parking of cars for the convenience of the patrons of the owner. 
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk, way, or parking lot other than a parking lot on the premises of the owner. 
(d) The owner of the store in which the shopping cart is used shall post in at least three prominent places in his store and at each exit therefrom a printed copy of this section, which copy shall be printed in type no smaller than 12 points. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-35)) 
Sec. 38-62. - Display of official rating on video movies. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Official rating means the official rating of a motion picture by the Classification and Rating Administration of the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Video movie means a videotape, videocassette, video disc, any prerecorded video display or visual depiction, any prerecorded device that can be converted to a visual depiction, or other reproduction or reconstruction of a motion picture. 
(b) No person may sell, rent, loan, or otherwise disseminate or distribute for monetary consideration a video movie unless the official rating of the motion picture from which the video movie is copied is clearly and prominently displayed in boldface type on the outside of the cassette, case, jacket, or other covering containing the video movie. Such video movie shall be clearly and prominently marked as "not rated" if: 
(1) The motion picture from which the video movie is copied has no official rating;
(2) The official rating of the motion picture from which the video movie is copied is not readily available to such person; or 
(3) The video movie has been altered so that its content materially differs from the motion picture. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-36)) 
Sec. 38-63. - Counterfeit or false proof of insurance document. 
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proof of insurance document means any document issued by, on behalf of, or purportedly on behalf of an insurer to a motor vehicle policyholder or applicant for motor vehicle coverage, which document is designed to constitute proof or evidence of the minimum motor vehicle liability insurance required by law for the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-10. 
(b) Unlawful acts. 
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to manufacture, sell, or distribute a counterfeit or false proof of insurance document. 
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a counterfeit or false proof of insurance document. 
(3) A proof of insurance document shall be deemed counterfeit or false if the proof of insurance document has been altered, modified, or originally issued in any manner which contains false information concerning the insurer, the owner, the motor vehicle, or the insurance thereon. 
(c) Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-37)) 
Sec. 38-64. - Fraudulent attempts to obtain refunds. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false or fictitious name, address, or telephone number as that person's own or to give the name, address, or telephone number of any other person without that other person's knowledge and approval for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain a refund for merchandise returned to a business establishment or a refund on a ticket or other document which is evidence of a service purchased from a business establishment, which service is yet to be performed. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-38)) 
Sec. 38-65. - False representation as representative of peace officer organization or fire service organization. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire service includes any person duly elected, appointed, or employed to engage in firefighting. 
Peace officer includes any person duly elected, appointed, or employed to engage in public law enforcement work. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation to solicit or accept a fee, consideration, or donation or to offer for sale or to sell advertising as a representative of a peace officer organization or fire service organization or under the guise of representing a peace officer organization or fire service organization unless such person is employed by, is acting pursuant to the authority of, or is a member of such organization. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-39)) 
Sec. 38-66. - Removal of collars or identifying items or marks on animals. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person without the express permission of the owner or lessee of an animal to remove a collar, tag, tattoo, or any identification mark artificially attached to or imprinted on an animal for the purposes of identification which causes or is likely to cause the loss of the animal to the owner thereof. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-40)) 
Sec. 38-67. - Obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers. 
(a) No person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct or hinder any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-41)) 
Sec. 38-68. - Obstructing or hindering firefighters. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Firefighter means: 
(1) Any person who is employed as a professional firefighter on a full-time basis for at least 40 hours per week by any county, municipal, or state fire department when such person has responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires, protecting life and property, enforcing municipal, county, or state fire prevention codes, or enforcing any law or ordinance pertaining to the prevention or control of fires; 
(2) Any volunteer firefighter as the term "volunteer firefighter" is defined by paragraph (7) of O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 as said paragraph (7) exists on January 1, 1988; or 
(3) Any person employed as a professional firefighter on a full-time basis for at least 40 hours per week by a person or corporation which has a contract with a municipality or county to provide fire prevention and firefighting services for such municipality or county when such person has responsibility for preventing and suppressing fires, protecting life and property, enforcing municipal or county fire prevention codes, or enforcing any municipal or county ordinances pertaining to the prevention and control of fires. 
(b) No person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct or hinder any firefighter in the lawful discharge of the firefighter's official duties. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-42)) 
Sec. 38-69. - Obstruction or hindering emergency medical technicians or emergency medical professionals; criminal penalty. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency medical professional means any person performing emergency medical services who is licensed or certified to provide health care in accordance with the provisions of chapter 11, chapter 26, or chapter 34 of title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 43-11-1 et seq., 43-26-1 et seq., or 43-34-1 et seq.). 
Emergency medical technician means any person who has been certified as an emergency medical technician, cardiac technician, paramedic, or first responder pursuant to chapter 11 of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.). 
(b) No person shall knowingly and willfully obstruct or hinder any emergency medical technician, any emergency medical professional, or any properly identified person working under the direction of an emergency medical professional in the lawful discharge of the official duties of such emergency medical technician, emergency medical professional, or properly identified person working under the direction of an emergency medical professional. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-43)) 
Sec. 38-70. - Obstructing or hindering persons making emergency telephone calls. 
(a) No person shall verbally or physically obstruct, prevent, or hinder another person with intent to cause or allow physical harm or injury to another person from making or completing a 9-1-1 telephone call or a call to any law enforcement agency to request police protection or to report the commission of a crime. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-44)) 
Sec. 38-71. - Giving false name, address, or birth date to law enforcement officer. 
(a) No person shall give a false name, address, or date of birth to a law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties with the intent of misleading the officer as to his identity or birth date. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-45)) 
Sec. 38-72. - False report of a crime. 
(a) No person shall willfully and knowingly give or cause a false report of a crime to be given to any law enforcement officer or agency of the state. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-46)) 
Sec. 38-73. - Transmitting false report of fire. 
(a) No person shall transmit in any manner to a fire department, public or private, or to any other group which is organized for the purpose of preventing or controlling fires a false report of a fire, knowing at the time that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such fire exists. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-47)) 
Sec. 38-74. - Request for ambulance service when not reasonably needed. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit in any manner a request for ambulance service to any person, firm, or corporation furnishing ambulance service, public or private, knowing at the time of making the request for ambulance service that there exists no reasonable need for such ambulance service. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-48)) 
Sec. 38-75. - Refusal to obey official request at fire or other emergency. 
(a) No person shall in a gathering refuse to obey the reasonable official request or order of a peace officer or firefighter to move, for the purpose of promoting the public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire or other emergency. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-49)) 
Sec. 38-76. - Aiding or permitting another to escape lawful custody or confinement. 
(a) No peace officer or employee of any place of lawful confinement shall recklessly permit any person in his custody to escape. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-50)) 
Sec. 38-77. - Tampering with evidence. 
(a) A person commits the offense of tampering with evidence when, with the intent to prevent the apprehension or cause the wrongful apprehension of any person or to obstruct the prosecution or defense of any person, he knowingly destroys, alters, conceals, or disguises physical evidence or makes, devises, prepares, or plants false evidence. 
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to abrogate or alter any privilege which any person is entitled to claim under existing laws. 
(c) This section is applicable only to person who violates subsection (a) of this section involving the prosecution or defense of a misdemeanor. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-51)) 
Sec. 38-78. - Riot. 
(a) Any two or more persons who shall do an unlawful act of violence or any other act in a violent and tumultuous manner commit the offense of riot. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-52)) 
Sec. 38-79. - Inciting to riot. 
(a) A person who with intent to riot does an act or engages in conduct which urges, counsels, or advises others to riot, at a time and place and under circumstances which produce a clear and present danger of a riot, commits the offense of inciting to riot 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-53)) 
Sec. 38-80. - Affray. 
(a) An affray is the fighting by two or more persons in some public place to the disturbance of the public tranquility. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-54)) 
Sec. 38-81. - Unlawful assembly. 
(a) It is unlawful for a person to knowingly participate in either of the following acts or occurrences: 
(1) The assembly of two or more persons for the purpose of committing an unlawful act and the failure to withdraw from the assembly on being lawfully commanded to do so by a peace officer and before any member of the assembly has inflicted injury to the person or property of another; or 
(2) The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of one supposed by the accused to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional or regulative powers over any person by violence; provided, however, that it shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution under this subsection that the accused withdrew from the assembly on being lawfully commanded to do so by a peace officer or before any member of the assembly had inflicted injury to the person or property of another. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-55)) 
Sec. 38-82. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a) A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b) Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c) This section shall not be deemed or construed to affect or limit the powers of counties or municipal corporations to adopt ordinances or resolutions prohibiting loitering or prowling within their respective limits. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-57)) 
Sec. 38-83. - Wearing mask, hood, or device which conceals identity of wearer. 
(a) No person shall wear a mask, hood, or device by which any portion of the face is so hidden, concealed, or covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer and is upon any public way or public property or upon the private property of another without the written permission of the owner or occupier of the property to do so. 
(b) This section shall not apply to:
(1) A person wearing a traditional holiday costume on the occasion of the holiday;
(2) A person lawfully engaged in trade and employment or in a sporting activity where a mask is worn for the purpose of ensuring the physical safety of the wearer, or because of the nature of the occupation, trade, or profession, or sporting activity; 
(3) A person using a mask in a theatrical production including use in Mardi Gras celebrations and masquerade balls; or 
(4) A person wearing a gas mask prescribed in emergency management drills and exercises or emergencies. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-58)) 
Sec. 38-84. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a) A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1) Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2) Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3) Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
(4) Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(b) This section shall not be deemed or construed to affect or limit the powers of counties or municipal corporations to adopt ordinances or resolutions prohibiting disorderly conduct within their respective limits. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-59)) 
Sec. 38-85. - Harassing phone calls. 
(a) A person commits the offense of harassing phone calls if such person telephones another person repeatedly, whether or not conversation ensues, for the purpose of annoying, harassing, or molesting another person or the family of such other person; uses over the telephone language threatening bodily harm; telephones and intentionally fails to hang up or disengage the connection; or knowingly permits any telephone under such person's control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this subsection. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-69)) 
Sec. 38-86. - Criminal defamation. 
(a) A person commits the offense of criminal defamation when, without a privilege to do so and with intent to defame another, living or dead, he communicates false matter which tends to blacken the memory of one who is dead or which exposes one who is alive to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, and which tends to provoke a breach of the peace. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-61)) 
Sec. 38-87. - Public drunkenness. 
(a) No person shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(b) This section shall not be construed to affect the powers delegated to counties or to municipal corporations to pass laws to punish drunkenness or disorderly conduct within their respective limits. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-62)) 
Sec. 38-88. - Obstructing highways, streets, sidewalks, or other public passages. 
(a) No person shall who, without authority of law, purposely or recklessly obstruct any highway, street, sidewalk, or other public passage in such a way as to render it impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard and fails or refuses to remove the obstruction after receiving a reasonable official request or the order of a peace officer that he do so. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-63)) 
Sec. 38-89. - Maintaining a disorderly house. 
(a) No person shall keep and maintain, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-64)) 
Sec. 38-90. - Abandoning, discarding, or leaving unattended containers which lock or fasten automatically; abandoning or discarding motor vehicle which does not have door or window removed. 
(a) No person shall leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, or discarded container which has a compartment of more than 1½ cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot easily be opened from the inside, without first removing the lid, door, or locking device from such container. 
(b) No person shall leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned or discarded motor vehicle which does not have at least one door which can easily be opened from the inside or one door or window which has been removed. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-65)) 
Sec. 38-91. - Pointing or aiming gun or pistol at another. 
(a) No person shall intentionally and without legal justification point or aim a gun or pistol at another, whether the gun or pistol is loaded or unloaded. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-66)) 
Sec. 38-92. - Discharge of gun or pistol near public highway or street. 
(a) No person shall, without legal justification, discharge a gun or pistol on or within 50 yards of a public highway or street. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-67)) 
Sec. 38-93. - Discharge of firearms on property of another. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge a firearm on the property of another person, firm, or corporation without having first obtained permission from the owner or lessee of the property. This section shall not apply to: 
(1) Persons who fire or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; and
(2) Law enforcement officers.
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-68)) 
Sec. 38-94. - Harassment of assistance dog by humans or other dogs; penalty. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assistance dog means a dog that is or has been trained by a licensed or certified person, organization, or agency to perform physical tasks for a physically challenged person. Assistance dogs include guide or leader dogs that guide individuals who are legally blind; hearing dogs that alert individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to specific sounds; and service dogs for individuals with disabilities other than blindness or deafness, which are trained to perform a variety of physical tasks, including, but not limited to, pulling a wheelchair, lending balance support, picking up dropped objects, or providing assistance in a medical crisis. 
Harass means to engage in any conduct directed toward an assistance dog that is knowingly likely to impede or interfere with the assistance dog's performance of its duties or that places the blind, deaf, or physically limited person being served or assisted by the dog in danger of injury. 
Notice means an oral or otherwise communicated warning proscribing the behavior of another person and a request that the person stop the particular behavior. 
(b) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally harasses or attempts to harass an assistance dog, knowing the dog to be an assistance dog. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-69)) 
Sec. 38-95. - Reserved. 
Sec. 38-96. - Carrying deadly weapons to or at public gatherings; affirmative defenses. 
(a) Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-127.1, it is unlawful for a person to carry to or while at a public gathering any explosive compound, firearm, or knife designed for the purpose of offense and defense. 
(b) For the purpose of this section, the term "public gathering" shall include, but shall not be limited to, athletic or sporting events, churches or church functions, political rallies or functions, publicly owned or operated buildings, or establishments at which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises. Nothing in this section shall otherwise prohibit the carrying of a firearm in any other public place by a person licensed or permitted to carry such firearm by this section. 
(c) This section shall not apply to competitors participating in organized sport shooting events. Law enforcement officers, peace officers retired from state or federal law enforcement agencies, judges, magistrates, solicitors-general, and district attorneys may carry pistols in publicly owned or operated buildings. 
(d) It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a person notifies a law enforcement officer or other person employed to provide security for a public gathering of the presence of such item as soon as possible after learning of its presence and surrenders or secures such item as directed by the law enforcement officer or other person employed to provide security for a public gathering. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-71)) 
Sec. 38-97. - Carrying pistol without license. 
(a) A person commits the offense of carrying a pistol without a license when he has or carries on or about his person, outside of his home, motor vehicle, or place of business, any pistol or revolver without having on his person a valid license issued by the judge of the probate court of the county in which he resides, provided that no permit shall be required for persons with a valid hunting or fishing license on their person or for persons not required by law to have hunting licenses who are engaged in legal hunting, fishing, or sport shooting when the persons have the permission of the owner of the land on which the activities are being conducted; provided, further, that the pistol or revolver, whenever loaded, shall be carried only in an open and fully exposed manner. 
(b) On and after October 1, 1996, a person licensed to carry a handgun in any state whose laws recognize and give effect within such state to a license issued pursuant to this section shall be authorized to carry a handgun in the state, but only while the licensee is not a resident of the state; provided, however, that such license holder shall carry the handgun in compliance with the laws of the state. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-72)) 
Sec. 38-98. - Possession of pistol or revolver by person under the age of 18 years. 
(a) Definition and assumption.
(1) For the purposes of this section, the term "pistol" or "revolver" means a firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet, or other missile can be discharged where the length of the barrel, not including any revolving, detachable, or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches; provided, however, that the term "pistol" or "revolver" shall not include a gun which discharges shot of 0.46 centimeters or less in diameter. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a pistol or revolver is considered loaded if:
a. There is a cartridge in the chamber or cylinder of the pistol or revolver;
b. The person is carrying on his body or attached to his clothing the pistol or revolver and the ammunition for such pistol or revolver; or 
c. The pistol or revolver and the ammunition for such pistol or revolver are in such close proximity to such person that such person could readily gain access to the pistol or revolver and the ammunition and load the pistol or revolver. 
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess or have under such person's control a pistol or revolver. 
(c) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1) Any person under the age of 18 years who is:
a. Attending a hunter education course or a firearms safety course;
b. Engaging in practice in the use of a firearm or target shooting at an established range authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction where such range is located; 
c. Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of a firearm or participating in or practicing for a performance by an organized group under 26 USC 501(c)(3) which uses firearms as a part of such performance; 
d. Hunting or fishing pursuant to a valid license if such person has in his possession such a valid hunting or fishing license if required; is engaged in legal hunting or fishing; has permission of the owner of the land on which the activities are being conducted; and the pistol or revolver, whenever loaded, is carried only in an open and fully exposed manner; or 
e. Traveling to or from any activity described in subsections (c)(1)a through d of this section if the pistol or revolver in such person's possession is not loaded; 
(2) Any person under the age of 18 years who is on real property under the control of such person's parent, legal guardian, or grandparent and who has the permission of such person's parent or legal guardian to possess a pistol or revolver; or 
(3) Any person under the age of 18 years who is at such person's residence and who, with the permission of such person's parent or legal guardian, possesses a pistol or revolver for the purpose of exercising the rights authorized in O.C.G.A. § 16-3-21 or 16-3-23. 
(d) Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 years who has been convicted of a forcible felony or forcible misdemeanor, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-1-3, or who has been adjudicated delinquent under the provisions of article 1 of chapter 11 of title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.) for an offense which would constitute a forcible felony or forcible misdemeanor, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-1-3, if such person were an adult. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-73)) 
Sec. 38-99. - Contributing to the delinquency, unruliness, or deprivation of a minor. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Delinquent act means a delinquent act as defined in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2. 
Felony means any act which constitutes a felony under the laws of the state, the laws of any other state of the United States, or the laws of the United States. 
Minor means any individual who is under the age of 17 years or any individual under the age of 18 years who is alleged to be a deprived child as such is defined in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2, relating to juvenile proceedings. 
Serious injury means an injury involving a broken bone, the loss of a member of the body, the loss of use of a member of the body, the substantial disfigurement of the body or of a member of the body, an injury which is life threatening, or any sexual abuse of a child under 16 years of age by means of an act described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-100(a)(4)(A), (a)(4)(G), or (a)(4)(I). 
(b) A person commits the offense of contributing to the delinquency, unruliness, or deprivation of a minor when such person: 
(1) Knowingly and willfully encourages, causes, abets, connives, or aids a minor in committing a delinquent act as such is defined in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2, relating to juvenile proceedings; 
(2) Knowingly and willfully encourages, causes, abets, connives, or aids a minor in committing an act which would cause such minor to be found to be an unruly child as such is defined in O.C.G.A. § 15-11-2, relating to juvenile proceedings; 
(c) It shall not be a defense to the offense provided for in this section that the minor has not been formally adjudged to have committed a delinquent act or has not been found to be unruly or deprived. 
(d) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-74)) 
Sec. 38-100. - Smoking in public places. 
(a) It is unlawful for a person to smoke tobacco in violation of chapter 12A of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1 et seq.). 
(b) This section shall be cumulative to and shall not prohibit the enactment of any other general and local laws, rules and regulations of state or local agencies, and local ordinances prohibiting smoking which are more restrictive than this section. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-75)) 
Sec. 38-101. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shall not include any fish nor shall such term include any pest that might be exterminated or removed from a business, residence, or other structure. 
Conviction shall include pleas of guilty or nolo contendere or probation as a first offender pursuant to article 3 of chapter 8 of title 42 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.) and any conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or probation as a first offender for an offense under the laws of the United States or any of the several states that would constitute a violation of this section if committed in the state. 
Willful neglect means the intentional withholding of food and water required by an animal to prevent starvation or dehydration. 
(b) A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals when he causes death or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering to any animal by an act, an omission, or willful neglect. 
(c) Before sentencing a defendant for any conviction under this section, the sentencing judge may require psychological evaluation of the offender and shall consider the entire criminal record of the offender. 
(d) The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of the state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, agricultural, animal husbandry, butchering, food processing, marketing, scientific, research, medical, zoological, exhibition, competitive, hunting, trapping, fishing, wildlife management, or pest control practices or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine nor to limit in any way the authority or duty of the department of agriculture, department of natural resources, any county board of health, any law enforcement officer, dog, animal, or rabies control officer, humane society, veterinarian, or private landowner protecting his property. 
(e) Defending property; humane methods.
(1) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a person from:
a. Defending his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
b. Injuring or killing an animal reasonably believed to constitute a threat for injury or damage to any property, livestock, or poultry. 
(2) The method used to injure or kill such animal shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely injures or kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in this subsection shall incur no civil or criminal liability for such injury or death. 
(f) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-76)) 
Sec. 38-102. - Gambling. 
(a) A person commits the offense of gambling when he:
(1) Makes a bet upon the partial or final result of any game or contest or upon the performance of any participant in such game or contest; 
(2) Makes a bet upon the result of any political nomination, appointment, or election or upon the degree of success of any nominee, appointee, or candidate; or 
(3) Plays and bets for money or other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, or balls. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-77)) 
Sec. 38-103. - Selling, loaning, distributing, or exhibiting to a minor; duties of video game retailers. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration or otherwise furnish or disseminate to a minor: 
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or 
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection (a)(1) of this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors. 
(b) Sales to minors or persons under 21 years of age.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or furnish to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show, or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors or exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by minors not admitted to any such premises. 
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or to furnish to a person under the age of 21 years an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a person under the age of 21 years to premises whereon there is exhibited a show or performance which is harmful to minors and which, in whole or in part, consists of sexually explicit nudity on the part of one or more live performers; sexual conduct on the part of one or more live performers; or sadomasochistic abuse on the part of one or more live performers. 
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent his age to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or (b) of this section or to his agent with the intent to unlawfully procure any material set forth in subsection (a) of this section or with the intent to unlawfully procure such person's admission to any motion picture, show, or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false representation to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or (b) of this section or to his agent that he is the parent or guardian of any minor or knowingly to make a false representation with respect to the age of another person with the intent to unlawfully procure for such other person any material set forth in subsection (a) of this section or with the intent to unlawfully procure such other person's admission to any motion picture, show, or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, expose, or display in public at newsstands or any other business or commercial establishment or at any other public place frequented by minors or where minors are or may be invited as part of the general public: 
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or 
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection (e)(1) of this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors. 
(f) Video games.
(1) As used in this subsection (f):
a. The term "video game" means an object or device that stores recorded data or instructions, receives data or instructions generated by a person who uses it, and, by processing the data or instructions, creates an interactive game capable of being played, viewed, or experienced on or through a computer, gaming system, console, or other technology. 
b. The term "video game retailer" means a person who sells or rents video games to the public. 
(2) Every video game retailer shall post a sign providing information to consumers about any video game rating system which appears on a video game offered by such retailer. The sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the portion of the establishment dedicated to the display or advertisement of video games. Each video game retailer shall make available to consumers, upon request, written information explaining each such rating system. 
(g) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-78)) 
Sec. 38-104. - Prohibited acts. 
(a) Sales of cigarettes or tobacco-related objects to minors prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to:
a. Sell or barter, directly or indirectly, any cigarettes or tobacco-related objects to a minor; 
b. Purchase any cigarettes or tobacco-related objects for any minor unless the minor for whom the purchase is made is the child of the purchaser; or 
c. Advise, counsel, or compel any minor to smoke, inhale, chew, or use cigarettes or tobacco-related objects. 
(2) The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, or tobacco-related objects by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the cigarettes, tobacco products, or tobacco-related objects are sold is 18 years of age or older. 
(3) In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom cigarettes or tobacco-related objects are to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 18 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such cigarettes or tobacco-related objects to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (b) of this section in order to verify the age of such person. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the cigarettes or tobacco-related objects are sold or otherwise furnished is less than 18 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such cigarettes or tobacco-related objects did so knowingly. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any minor to:
(1) Purchase or possess for personal use any cigarettes or tobacco-related objects. This subsection shall not apply to possession of cigarettes or tobacco-related objects by a minor when a parent or guardian of such minor gives the cigarettes or tobacco-related objects to the minor and possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present; or 
(2) Misrepresent such minor's identity or age or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or procuring any cigarettes or tobacco-related objects. 
(c) Violation and penalty.
(1) Any person found guilty of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(2) Any minor found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by performance of community service not exceeding 20 hours, attendance at a publicly or privately sponsored lecture or discussion on the health hazards of smoking or tobacco use, provided such lecture or discussion is offered without charge to the minor, or a combination of both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-79)) 
Sec. 38-105. - Posting signs in place of business. 
(a) Any person owning or operating a place of business in which cigarettes, tobacco products, or tobacco related objects are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place a sign which shall contain the following statement: 
"SALE OF CIGARETTES, TOBACCO, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR TOBACCO RELATED OBJECTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW." 
Such sign shall be printed in letters of at least one-half inch in height. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-80)) 
Sec. 38-106. - Drug-related objects. 
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance shall have the same meaning as defined in article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.), relating to controlled substances. For the purposes of this section, the term "controlled substance" shall include marijuana as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21(16). 
Dangerous drug shall have the same meaning as defined in article 3 of chapter 13 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-71 et seq.), relating to dangerous drugs. 
Drug-related object means any machine, instrument, tool, equipment, contrivance, or device which an average person would reasonably conclude is intended to be used for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1) To introduce into the human body any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state; 
(2) To enhance the effect on the human body of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state; 
(3) To conceal any quantity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state; or 
(4) To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of any dangerous drug or controlled substance under circumstances in violation of the laws of the state. 
Knowingly means having general knowledge that a machine, instrument, tool, item of equipment, contrivance, or device is a drug-related object or having reasonable grounds to believe that any such object is or may, to an average person, appear to be a drug-related object. If any such object has printed thereon or is accompanied by instructions explaining the purpose and use of such object and if following such instructions would cause a person to commit an act involving the use or possession of a dangerous drug or controlled substance in violation of the laws of the state, then such instructions shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge that the object in question is a drug-related object. 
Minor means any unmarried person under the age of 18 years. 
(b) Except as otherwise provided by subsection (d) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, deliver, distribute, display for sale, or provide to a minor or knowingly possess with intent to sell, deliver, distribute, display for sale, or provide to a minor any drug-related object. 
(c) It shall be unlawful for any minor falsely to represent to any person that such minor is 18 years of age or older with the intent to purchase or otherwise obtain any drug-related object. 
(d) No person shall be guilty of violating subsection (b) of this section if:
(1) The person had reasonable cause to believe that the minor involved was 18 years of age or older because the minor exhibited to such person a driver's license, birth certificate, or other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older; 
(2) The person made an honest mistake in believing that the minor was 18 years of age or over after making a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of the minor; 
(3) The person was the parent or guardian of the minor; or
(4) The person was acting in his capacity as an employee or official of any governmental agency, governmental institution, public school or other public educational institution, any bona fide private school, educational institution, health care facility, or institution; or the person was acting in his capacity as a registered pharmacist or veterinarian or under the direction of a registered pharmacist or veterinarian to sell such object for a legitimate medical purpose. 
(e) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-81)) 
Sec. 38-107. - Penalty for abandonment of dangerous drugs, poisons, or controlled substances. 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to abandon, in a public place, any dangerous drug, poison, or controlled substance as defined by article 2 or article 3 of chapter 13 of title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., or 16-13-70 et seq.). 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-82)) 
Sec. 38-108. - Possession of marijuana less than one ounce. 
(a) It is unlawful for any person to possess, have under his control, manufacture, deliver, distribute, dispense, administer, purchase, sell, or possess with intent to distribute marijuana, of less than one ounce. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-83)) 
Sec. 38-109. - Possession and use of drug-related objects. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or possess with the intent to use, any object or materials of any kind for the purpose of planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana or a controlled substance. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-84)) 
Sec. 38-110. - Attempt or conspiracy to commit offense under sections 38-111 and 38-112. 
Any person who attempts or conspires to commit any offense defined in sections 38-111 and 38-112 shall be, upon conviction thereof, punished by imprisonment not exceeding the maximum punishment prescribed for the offense, the commission of which was the object of the attempt or conspiracy. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-85)) 
Sec. 38-111. - Drugs to be kept in original container. 
(a) Possession and control of controlled substances or dangerous drugs by anyone other than the individuals specified in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-35 or 16-13-72 shall be legal only if such drugs are in the original container in which they were dispensed by the pharmacist or the practitioner of the healing arts and are labeled according to O.C.G.A. § 26-3-8. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-86)) 
Sec. 38-112. - Use of fictitious name or false address when obtaining drugs. 
(a) No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain any dangerous drug by use of a fictitious name or by the giving of a false address. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-87)) 
Sec. 38-113. - Obtaining or attempting to obtain dangerous drugs by fraud, forgery, or concealment of material fact. 
(a) No person shall obtain or attempt to obtain any dangerous drug or attempt to procure the administration of any such drug by: 
(1) Fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, or subterfuge;
(2) The forgery or alteration of any prescription or of any written order;
(3) The concealment of a material fact; or
(4) The use of a false name or the giving of a false address.
(b) Nothing in this section shall apply to drug manufacturers or their agents or employees when such manufacturers or their agents or employees are authorized to engage in and are actually engaged in investigative activities directed toward the safeguarding of the manufacturer's trademark. 
(c) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-88)) 
Sec. 38-114. - Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverage in motor vehicles. 
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Being operated, in relation to motor vehicles, means either moving or standing. 
Open container means any container that is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
Public roads mean all public highways, streets and roads located within the unincorporated area of the county and shall also mean any public property owned by the county, either individually or jointly with the City of Fitzgerald. 
(b) Prohibited. 
(1) It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle in the county or while a passenger is in or on a motor vehicle being operated in the county. 
(2) An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a motor vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not locked in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
(3) An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a motor vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(c) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1) A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or the law of any other state; 
(2) A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or the law of any other state; or 
(3) A passenger of a self-contained motor home that is in excess of 21 feet in length.
(d) Penalties. Any person, operator of a motor vehicle or passenger who violates this section shall be punished as is provided in section 1-11 
(Code 2000, §§ 34-1, 34-2; Ord. No. 90-1, §§ 1—4, 5-8-1990) 
Secs. 38-115—38-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MODEL GLUE 

Sec. 38-134. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Model glue means any glue, cement, solvent, or chemical substance containing one or more of the following chemicals: acetone, amyl chloride (iso- and tertiary), benzene, carbon disulfide, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, ether, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, isopropyl acetate, isopropyl alcohol, isopropyl ether, methyl acetate, methyl alcohol, propylene dichloride, propylene oxide, trichlorethylene, amyl acetate, amyl alcohol, butyl acetate, butyl alcohol, butyl ether, diethylcarbonate, diethylene oxide (dioxane), dipropyl ketone, ethyl butyrate, ethylene glycol monoethyl ether (cellosolve), ethylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (methyl cellosolve acetate), isobutyl alcohol, methyl amyl acetate, methyl amyl alcohol, methyl isobutyl ketone, or toluene. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-89)) 
Sec. 38-135. - Intentional inhalation; application of division to anesthesia. 
(a) No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, or dulling of the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from any model glue, provided that this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any anesthesia for medical or dental purposes. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-90)) 
Sec. 38-136. - Possession, sale, or transfer. 
(a) No person shall intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession, or receive possession of any model glue for the purpose of violating or aiding another person to violate this division. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-91)) 
Sec. 38-137. - Sale or transfer to minors. 
(a) No person shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another person under 18 years of age, nor shall any person under 18 years of age possess or buy any model glue unless the purchase is for model building or other lawful use and the person under 18 years of age has in his possession and exhibits to the seller or transferor the written consent of his parent or legal guardian to make such purchase or take possession of the model glue, provided any minor who shall transfer possession of model glue to another minor for model building or other lawful purpose shall not be held criminally liable for failing to require exhibition of the written consent of the transferee-minor's parents or for failing to keep same available for inspection by law enforcement officials. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-92)) 
Sec. 38-138. - Maintenance of records of sales to minors. 
(a) The person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age must require the purchaser to exhibit the written consent of his parent or guardian and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept available by the seller for inspection by law enforcement officials for a period of six months. 
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-2-2010, § 1(59-93)) 
Chapters 39—41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; automatic membership of counties and municipalities in regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-33. (Back)
Sec. 42-20. - River corridor protection plan. 
The Ben Hill County Ocmulgee River Corridor Protection Plan shall be adopted by the board of commissioners as an amendment to the Joint Ben Hill County-City of Fitzgerald Comprehensive Plan. 
(Code 2000, § 38-32; Res. of 3-8-1994) 
Chapters 43—45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - ROADS AND BRIDGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY INSTALLATIONS 

Sec. 46-20. - Application for permit. 
Any utility that requires a permit for the work described in this article shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of such permit, file an application in writing with the county manager specifically describing the nature, extent and location of the portion of the utility affected together with the required bond or security as described in this article, together with the required permit fee. 
(Code 2000, § 42-32; Res. of 6-4-1986) 
Sec. 46-21. - Removal, relocation or discontinuance of utility. 
(a) Where necessary by the construction, expansion, widening or maintenance of any part of the county road system lying outside the corporate limits of the City of Fitzgerald, the county may order the removal, relocation or discontinuance of the utility, equipment, facility or appliances located on the road. If the county should order the removal or relocation of a utility or in the performance of such work itself, the procedure to be followed by the county shall conform to the procedure set forth for the state department of transportation in O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-171 and 32-6-173. It is further provided that the county may require the removal or relocation of any facility of a utility from the county road system when in the reasonable opinion of the county the facility constitutes an obstruction or interference with the use or safe operation of such road by the traveling public or when in the reasonable opinion of the county the facility will interfere with such contemplated construction or maintenance. 
(b) Whenever the county reasonably determines it necessary to have a utility facility removed or relocated, the county manager or the chairperson of the board of commissioners shall give to the utility at least 60 days' written notice directing the removal and relocation of such utility obstruction. If the utility does not thereafter begin removal with a reasonable time sufficient to allow for engineering and other procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the utility facility, the county may give the utility a final notice directing that such removal shall commence not later than ten days from the receipt of such final notice. 
(c) If the utility does not within ten days from receipt of such final notice begin to remove or relocate the facility or having so begun removal or relocation thereafter fails to complete the removal or relocation within a reasonable time, the county may remove or relocate the same with its own employees or by employing or contracting for the necessary engineering, labor, tools, equipment, supervision or other necessary services or materials and whatever else is necessary to accomplish the removal or relocation; and the expenses of such removal or relocation shall be paid by the utility and may be collected by the county as provided by law and this article. 
(Code 2000, § 42-33; Res. of 6-4-1986) 
Sec. 46-22. - Applicability of state law. 
The regulations provided in this article are not intended to be more restrictive with respect to utilities affected by this article than are equivalent regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation with respect to utilities on the state highway system under authority of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-174; and where these regulations conflict in any manner with the regulations promulgated by the department of transportation, the regulations of the department of transportation shall control. However, in every event, a permit shall be required for all work to be performed by a utility as described in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 42-34; Res. of 6-4-1986) 
Sec. 46-23. - Minimum requirements. 
Included within this article is the installation of telephone lines, gas lines, water lines, sanitary sewer lines, electrical lines, fuel lines, TV cables, open storm drainage, storm sewers and other facilities. The following minimum requirements shall be adhered to where applicable: 
(1) The installation of an authorized facility shall be done under the direction and control of the county road superintendent, who shall be notified before work is commenced. 
(2) Request for breaking of pavement must be shown under special requirements of the application. Where breaking of pavement has been approved, a six-inch concrete slab will be poured over the backfilled trench and will rest on undisturbed soil. If the pavement is asphalt, the surface of the six-inch concrete slab will be 1½ inches below the surface of the abutting pavement. The 1½-inch section will be paved with Type D or E plant asphalt. The finished surface will be smooth and flush with abutting pavement. 
(3) Utilities running parallel with the road must be placed in the outer three feet with pipes to be at least three feet deep and trenches to be no more than 12 inches wide. Underground utilities must be marked. 
(4) In crossing roadways, the facility trench backfill will be made in six-inch layers and each layer firmly compacted. 
(5) Cost of installation, maintenance and repair of utility facilities is to be paid by the utility applying for the permit. Rights of abutting property owners are not affected, nor does the county assume responsibility for damages arising from the utility construction it authorizes. 
(6) The utility must reimburse the county for damages to the public road or its fixtures, such as bridges and guardrails, signs or drainage pipe; and payment must be made within 30 days after invoicing by the county. 
(7) If the board of commissioners decides to relocate or widen the existing road, the utility may be required to take up (both above- and below-ground type) and reinstall such sections of their equipment as good engineering practice requires; and the utility will bear the expense without regard to the type of road construction or maintenance work involved. The work shall be completed within 15 working days after notification by the county commissioners or within such other time as may be approved in writing by the county road superintendent. 
(8) The county road superintendent must give approval to a final inspection of utility construction. 
(Code 2000, § 42-35; Res. of 6-4-1986) 
Chapters 47—49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— By contract dated October 1, 1994, the City of Fitzgerald and the Ben Hill County Regional Solid Waste Management Authority entered into an agreement providing for the operation of such authority. An official copy of such agreement is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Solid waste management plan adopted. 
(a) The South Georgia Multi-Jurisdictional Solid Waste Management Plan, sponsored by the South Georgia Solid Waste Advisory Board and performed under the board's supervision by Mayes, Sudderth and Etheredge, Inc., on behalf of this county and 33 other cities and counties in the South Georgia region, is adopted as the official public policy of the county. 
(b) The update of the Short Term Work Program, approved by the department of community affairs after review, approval and submitted by the South Georgia Regional Development Center, is adopted. 
(Code 2000, § 46-1; Res. of 10-6-1992; Res. of 3-3-1998) 
Sec. 50-2. - County garbage containers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place within the metal trash or garbage containers provided for trash collection by the county anything other than household garbage; and it shall further be unlawful for any person to place any trash, garbage or other debris around trash or garbage containers other than inside of the trash or garbage containers. 
(Code 2000, § 46-2; Ord. of 1-2-1990) 
Secs. 50-4—50-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL FEES 

Sec. 50-25. - Fixed; classes. 
There is fixed, established and imposed upon and there shall be collected from each owner and each occupant of business and/or industrial properties within the unincorporated area of the county a garbage collection fee in an amount determined by the board of commissioners by ordinance and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the county clerk according to the following classification scheme (provided that only one such fee shall be collected with respect to any such property or unit each month): 
(1) Class I consists of small businesses or offices having access to a dumpster and refuse consisting of small amounts of paper byproducts. 
(2) Class II consists of medium businesses or offices having access to a dumpster and refuse in larger volume of paper byproducts. 
(3) Class III consists of large businesses having access to a dumpster and generating paper byproducts and limited amount of perishable refuse. 
(4) Class IV consists of businesses or industries having larger amounts of all refuse, including perishable refuse and more frequent removal of dumpsters. 
(5) Class V consists of businesses or industries based on square footage of buildings or number of dumpsters, frequency of removal of dumpsters, and amount of refuse generated. 
(6) Class VI consists of supermarkets and large commercial retail outlets.
(7) Class VII consists of heavy industries.
(Code 2000, § 46-31; Ord. No. 94-1, § 1, 3-8-1994) 
Sec. 50-26. - Adjustments authorized. 
The county manager is given the authority to adjust the fees set forth in section 50-25 based upon nature, volume and frequency of pickup desired or needed on all refuse and to set an additional fee for additional dumpster placed at the business. 
(Code 2000, § 46-32; Ord. No. 94-1, § 2, 3-8-1994) 
Sec. 50-27. - Billing officer, agency. 
The county is authorized to appoint an officer or agency of the county to make monthly billing for the fees and charges fixed and imposed in this article and collect and receive payments within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 46-33; Ord. No. 94-1, § 3, 3-8-1994) 
Sec. 50-28. - Collection of delinquent bills. 
(a) Should any person liable for payment of the fees and charges fixed and imposed by this article fail to pay the fees and charges within 31 days after having been billed, the county shall be authorized to take either or both of the following steps to promote the collection of the bill: 
(1) Discontinue garbage collection service.
(2) Institute legal proceedings.
(b) The failure or refusal of any person liable for the payment of the fees and charges fixed and imposed by this article to accept the garbage collection services offered by the county shall not relieve such person of the obligation to pay such fees and charges. 
(Code 2000, § 46-34; Ord. No. 94-1, §§ 4, 5, 3-8-1994; Ord. No. 2004-01, 1-6-2004) 
Secs. 50-29—50-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 50-60. - Applicability and creation of special tax district. 
(a) Applicability and findings.
(1) This article applies to the preparation, storage, collection, transportation, and disposal of all residential solid waste in the area under the jurisdiction of the county within the special tax district of the county as defined hereinbelow. It prescribes rules and regulations therefor, regulates the private collection of solid waste, prohibits private solid waste collection, and prohibits the dumping of solid waste within the special tax district. 
(2) The board of commissioners hereby find that the public health of the citizens of the special tax district described in this section would be adversely affected should individual citizens be allowed to dispose of solid waste, as defined hereinbelow, upon their own private property. The board of commissioners further find that it would be in the public interest for the board to pass an ordinance further regulating garbage and solid waste collection and disposal in the special tax district described in this section. 
(b) There is hereby created, pursuant to art. 9, § 2, ¶ 6 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1983) [Ga. Const. (1983) art. IX, § II, ¶ VI] a special tax district within the county, which shall be known as the "Ben Hill County Solid Waste Disposal Tax District," hereinafter referred to as "the district." 
(c) The boundaries of the county solid waste disposal tax district shall be all of the property situate, lying and being in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(d) All taxes and fees imposed within the district shall be used and appropriated to pay the cost of collection, storage and/or disposal service within the district, and the necessary related expenses associated therewith, including but not limited to the purchase of solid waste collection, storage and/or disposal vehicles, trailers and other equipment; the construction and operation of solid waste collection, storage and/or disposal, collection and/or transfer stations; transportation costs to the disposal site and/or transfer site; tipping fees and disposal charges; and such other costs and expenses as may be deemed needed from time to time by the board of commissioners in order to collect, store and/or dispose of the solid waste generated within the district. 
(Code 2000, § 46-40; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brown goods means sofas, chairs, mattresses and the like. 
Garbage means putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, operation, cooking, serving or consumption of food and including food containers. 
Refuse means discarded waste materials in a solid or semiliquid state, consisting of garbage, rubbish or a combination thereof. 
Residential unit means a dwelling or occupied living space within the county solid waste disposal tax district, used or constructed for use as a residence for one family. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials. 
Solid waste means garbage, rubbish or refuse as defined in this section. 
(Code 2000, § 46-41; Ord. No. 99-6, § 2, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-62. - Unlawful disposal of refuse, garbage or rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or bury or caused to be dumped or buried any garbage, refuse, or rubbish anywhere in the area of the county solid waste disposal tax district. 
(Code 2000, § 46-42; Ord. No. 99-6, § 3, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-63. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse. 
It shall be the duty of both the occupant and owner of every residential unit located in the county solid waste disposal tax district to keep all solid waste generated by each such residential unit pending collection and disposal by the county, its franchises, licenses, permittee, or contract collector as follows: 
(1) All solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in watertight plastic bags and the top secured and placed in a solid waste container. One 90-gallon roll container shall be provided to each residential unit by the county or its franchisee or contract collector for use by that unit for solid waste storage and disposal purposes. 
(2) Solid waste shall be bagged and stored in wheeled containers furnished by the county, franchisee, or contract collector which shall be covered at all times. Such containers must be kept clean. Cardboard boxes which because of size cannot be placed in the wheeled containers furnished by the county, franchisee, or contract collector shall be placed alongside the container. Brown goods to be disposed of shall also be placed neatly alongside the wheeled container. Containers must be placed at the curbside by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next collection day if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. 
(Code 2000, § 46-43; Ord. No. 99-6, § 4, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-64. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection by county. 
(a) The county shall have the exclusive right to collect and dispose of all residential solid waste within the district either through employees of the county or franchisee or contract with or license or permit issued to a person, firm, corporation, or entity engaged in the business of residential solid waste collection and disposal. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity shall collect, remove, transport or dispose of any residential solid waste within the district except as provided for herein and except with the express permission of the county. 
(b) The county or its franchisee or other designated contract collector will collect solid waste within the district under the following conditions: 
(1) Solid waste will be collected once each week from residential units. Brown goods will also be collected from time to time. 
(2) The county or its franchises or other designated contract collector may decline to collect solid waste contained in unauthorized containers; any containers that contain excessive liquids; or any residential solid waste not properly contained. 
(3) The county shall not be responsible for collection of discarded building material, dirt, rock, or appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling building materials, trees, tree trimmings, yard trimmings, bushes, or other vegetation, or trash or waste material from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, or building contractors. 
(Code 2000, § 46-44; Ord. No. 99-6, § 5, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-65. - Payment. 
The board of commissioners, its franchisee, or contract collector shall prepare and mail to each residential unit in the district a statement showing the amounts of the monthly installments due for residential solid waste collection services. These statements shall be prepared monthly in advance and each monthly payment shall be paid in advance by the owner or occupant of each residential unit. A late payment penalty and an assessment of interest shall be imposed upon each account for which payment is not made within the time limits prescribed herein. Owners or occupants of each residential unit may pay the entire amount due for the calendar year in advance if they so desire. No owner or occupant of a residential unit shall be required to pay the monthly fee set forth herein until such time as the county or its franchisee or other designated contract collector shall implement service to said residential unit by furnishing the container described in section 50-63. 
(Code 2000, § 46-45; Ord. No. 99-6, § 6, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-66. - Fees. 
(a) The fees for collection of residential solid waste levied pursuant to the terms of this article, and all late charges and interest accruing thereon are hereby deemed and constituted a tax and are hereby levied severally against the owner and occupant of each residential unit, including all residential units located in mobile homes courts and/or trailer courts. The fees, late charges and interest prescribed in this section shall be treated in all respects as provided by law with respect to ad valorem and state taxes, and uncollected fees, late charges and interest shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property upon which each residential unit is located; on the personal property composing a residential unit, and upon the personal property of the occupant of each residential unit, until paid. Writs of fieri fiacas may be issued by the county for fees which are past due and collection may be effected as provided by law for ad valorem or other state taxes, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.3 or other applicable law. The monthly fee for solid waste collection hereby levied shall be due and payable as set forth in the statement and if the same are not paid by the time set forth in statement, there is hereby levied a late charge equal to ten percent of the amount due or $1.00, whichever is greater. Additionally, interest will be charged against all uncollected fees over 30 days past due at the same rate of interest borne by uncollected ad valorem taxes. 
(b) The monthly fees billed to each residential unit shall be considered late after the date as set forth in the statement. 
(Code 2000, § 46-46; Ord. No. 99-6, § 7, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-67. - Exemption for indigency. 
The board of commissioners may relieve affected persons from the responsibility for payment of collection fees imposed herein on account of the indigency of said affected person upon a satisfactory showing of same to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 46-47; Ord. No. 99-6, § 8, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-68. - Nonliability. 
Whenever the owner or occupant of a residential unit from which solid waste is collected by the county, franchisee, or contract collector authorizes or permits the use of private driveways or other portions of private property for such collection, such authorization or permission, whether express or implied, shall be deemed to constitute a waiver on the part of the owner or occupant of the residential unit of any claim for damages against the county and/or its franchisee or contract collector. 
(Code 2000, § 46-48; Ord. No. 99-6, § 9, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-69. - Fee rates. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of residential solid waste within the district shall be established from time to time by ordinance by the board of commissioners. The initial fee shall be $15.00 per month per residential unit. 
(Code 2000, § 46-49; Ord. No. 99-6, § 10, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-70. - Use of facilities required; notice of service termination; resumption. 
(a) The owner and occupant of each residential unit, including residential units located in mobile home courts and trailer courts, shall dispose of solid waste only by the means of a collection and disposal service provided by the county, franchisee, permittee, or designated contractor. 
(b) Whenever a residential unit becomes vacant, destroyed by fire or other casualty, or is demolished or for some other similar reason no longer generates solid waste, it is incumbent severally upon the owner and former occupant of the said residential unit to notify the county in writing of same. The county may cause such investigation of the report as it deems appropriate and if the county finds the same to be consistent with the provisions hereof, the residential unit in question shall be removed from the solid waste collection list and the fee charge shall thereupon cease. Until such notice shall have been received by the county, however, the fee shall continue to be charged and shall continue to be collectible, notwithstanding the fact that service is not in fact rendered to the residential unit. Similarly, if service has been discontinued pursuant to a notice as provided in this section but is thereafter resumed, or if land which was previously vacant has been improved with a residential unit and begins to receive service, it shall be incumbent on the owner and occupant, severally, to notify the county of such commencement of or resumption of service. The fee prescribed in this article shall be payable for such property from and after the date of resumption of service, whether or not notice has been received. 
(c) The county may charge a fee for resumption of service to the owner and/or occupant of a residential unit where service has been previously discontinued. The amount of such fee shall be that as set from time to time by ordinance by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 46-50; Ord. No. 99-6, § 11, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-71. - Utilization of solid waste containers. 
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee of each residential unit to remove and replace all solid waste generated by the occupants of each such residential unit into bags placed in the wheeled container furnished for solid waste removal and to place the wheeled container at the location designated for collection on designated pickup days. 
(b) The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of each residential unit shall, not later than 7:00 a.m. on the normal pickup days designated by the county, franchisee, or contract collector, place the container at the location established by the county, franchisee, or contract collector for pickup. Containers shall be removed from the location to the premises of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of each such residential unit no later than 8:00 p.m. on the normal day of pickup, subject only to the exceptions hereinafter enumerated. 
(c) The following are excepted from subsection (b) of this section:
(1) Any person with documented disabilities, because of age or physical condition, living in a residential unit where there is no resident or occupant thereof physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location shall notify the county and if the county shall find that there is no one in or upon the residential unit on a regular basis physically capable of placing the container at the designated pickup location, then the county may arrange for the solid waste to be picked up at the place on the premises of the residential unit where the container is maintained by the occupant. 
(2) The county may establish exceptions for designated residential units which are determined to be suitable for curbside pickup, taking into consideration the terrain features or other physical impediments, and at such premises, pickup service shall be provided to residential units as determined by the county or, in the alternative, the occupant may be instructed to place only plastic, securely tied bags at a designated location on scheduled pickup days. 
(d) The wheeled containers furnished by the county, franchisee, or contract collector shall not be removed from the premises of the residential unit to which they are delivered and it shall be the duty of the occupant of the residential unit, in the event the dwelling is to be vacated by the occupant, to notify the county seven days prior to the vacancy. 
(e) In the event a container previously furnished by the county, its franchisee, or contract collector to any residential unit is damaged, destroyed or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the premises to immediately notify the county and to cooperate with the board of county commissioners and the county sheriff in investigating the cause of the damage, destruction or theft. Further, the owner or occupant shall, if requested to do so, appear in the appropriate court as a witness should a prosecution result from the investigation. A replacement container shall be furnished to the residential unit and such unit may be charged a replacement fee as determined by the county. 
(f) Additional containers may be obtained by each residential unit upon payment of an additional monthly fee to the county, as may be set from time to time by ordinance by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 46-51; Ord. No. 99-6, § 12, 12-21-1999) 
Sec. 50-72. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, business, corporation or entity to willfully and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, business, corporation or other entity, willfully and with intent to defraud the county, to evade or defeat or attempt to evade or defeat any tax, fee, penalty or interest due the county or the payment thereof, imposed by this article. 
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned any material of any nature in any container belonging to or used by the county or its franchisee and/or designated contract collectors for residential solid waste collection purposes. 
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, and intentionally damage or destroy or to allow or permit damage to or destruction of any container provided by the county, its franchisee, or designated contract collector. 
(e) Each violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or 60 days imprisonment in the county jail, or both. Ordinance violations may be tried upon citation with or without a prosecuting attorney as well as upon accusations, as provided in the O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. Citations shall be issued by the county board of commissioners or its designee. Service upon corporations, partnerships, and other entities and organizations shall be affected by serving any managing agent located in the county, or by serving the registered agent, or any officer or partner of the corporation, partnership, organization or entity. The provisions of this article may also be enforced through the use of other remedies, such as injunctive relief, provided by the laws of this state. 
(f) Whenever a corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity shall violate any of the provisions of this article such violations shall be deemed to be also that of the individual directors, officers, or agents of such corporation, partnership, organization or other artificial entity who shall have authorized, ordered, or done any of the acts constituting in whole or in part such violation. In such cases, service shall also be made upon the individual director, officer or other agent accused of authorizing, ordering or doing acts constituting in whole or in part violations of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 46-52; Ord. No. 99-6, § 13, 12-21-1999) 
Chapters 51—53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - TAXATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JOINT SALES AND USE TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. (Back)
Secs. 54-20—54-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL COUNTY ONE PERCENT SALES AND USE TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Special county one percent sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq. (Back)
Sec. 54-42. - Authorized; use of proceeds. 
(a) There is authorized to be levied and collected within the county an additional sales and use tax in the amount of one percent on all sales and uses within the county as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq., for the following purposes: 
(1) Acquiring, constructing, installing and equipping detention facilities, together with law enforcement facilities and offices and administrative offices, and public parking areas and other structures or facilities useful or desirable in connection with such facilities, acquiring all necessary property for such facilities, both real and personal, to pay expenses necessary to accomplish the foregoing; 
(2) Retiring previously incurred general obligation debt, the proceeds of which were used for the construction of a multipurpose recreational facility of the county; 
(3) Retiring previously incurred general obligation debt, the proceeds of which were used for the renovation and expansion of the county's jail; 
(4) Retiring previously incurred general obligation debt, the proceeds of which were used for the acquisition of land for the expansion of the county's solid waste disposal facility; 
(5) Acquiring, constructing, installing and equipping capital outlay projects to be operated by the Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County Development Authority for the use and benefit of the citizens of the entire county for the purpose of developing and promoting trade, commerce, employment, cultural and agricultural opportunities, including the acquisition, renovation and improvement of industrial, commercial, recreational and cultural facilities and other projects that will promote the economic and public welfare in the county; and to pay expenses incident to accomplishing these purposes. 
(b) As required by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-111(a):
(1) The proceeds of such special-purpose sales and use tax are to be used to finance the projects set forth in subsection (a) of this section, each of which is for the use and benefit of the citizens of the entire county; 
(2) Such sales and use tax is authorized to be imposed for a period of time not to exceed 20 consecutive calendar quarters (five years), beginning July 1, 1995, and continuing until June 30, 2000, unless terminated earlier pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(3) The maximum cost of the capital outlay projects other than for road, street and bridge purposes to be funded from the proceeds of such sales and use tax is $9,200,000.00; and 
(4) The maximum cost of the projects to be financed with general obligation bonds is $6,000,000.00.
(Code 2000, § 54-61; Res. of 1-13-1995) 
Editor's note— 
Pursuant to an election held March 21, 1995, county voters approved imposition of the special county one-percent sales and use tax. 
Secs. 54-43—54-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. (Back)
Sec. 54-73. - Granted. 
Pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ I, 100 percent of the value of the following classes of tangible personal property are exempted from ad valorem taxation effective January 1, 1980: 
(1) Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use for consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in the state. For purposes of this subsection, the following activities shall constitute substantial modification in the ordinary course of manufacturing, processing, or production operations: 
a. The cleaning, drying, pest control treatment, or segregation by grade of grain, peanuts or other oil seeds, or cotton; 
b. The remanufacture of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components, meaning the substantial overhauling or rebuilding of aircraft engines or aircraft engine parts or components; and 
c. The blending of fertilizer bulk materials into a custom mixture, whether performed at a commercial fertilizer blending plant, retail outlet, or any application site; 
(2) Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced in the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured; or 
(3) Inventory of finished goods that on January 1 are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and that are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods shipped into the state from outside the state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state, including foreign merchandise in transit. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in the state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf where such property is being stored shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a freeport exemption has been claimed shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of the state and of any political subdivision of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 54-96) 
Chapters 55—57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic offenses triable on complaint without indictment except in superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-3; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. (Back)
Secs. 58-20—58-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 58-42. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Fitzgerald. 
Deviating truck means a truck that leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling within the city as permitted in this article. 
Truck means any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, and having more than six wheels. 
Truck route means any street or road within the county designated as a truck route by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
Vehicle, for the purposes of determination of weight or number of axles, includes any tractor-trailer, which together shall comprise one vehicle. 
(Code 2000, § 58-66; Ord. No. 88-2, § I, 9-6-1988) 
Sec. 58-43. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1) Protect the public safety and the use of the streets and roads of the county;
(2) Facilitate and expedite traffic within the county; and
(3) Protect the streets and roads of the county from unusual wear and damage.
(Code 2000, § 58-67; Ord. No. 88-2, § V, 9-6-1988) 
Sec. 58-44. - Application of article. 
(a) Restricted operation. Except as specifically set out in this article, no truck shall be operated over any public street or road in the county other than a truck route. 
(b) Exceptions. 
(1) Any truck may deviate from a truck route and operate over a prohibited street or road where necessary to reach a destination point in the county or the city for the conduct of business, provided truck routes and state or federal highways and Merrimac, Monitor, Sultana and Roanoke Drives (hereinafter referred to as "drive" or "drives") are used until reaching the intersection of the prohibited street or road nearest such destination. 
(2) Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street or road where necessary to leave a point of origin within the county or the city for the conduct of business, provided it leaves such prohibited street or road at the nearest intersection of a truck route, state or federal highway, or drive, to such point of origin. 
(3) Any truck may be operated over a prohibited street or road if owned or operated by the city or county, or if operated by any public utility, contractor or materialman while engaged in repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or utilities within the county or city. 
(Code 2000, § 58-68; Ord. No. 88-2, § II, 9-6-1988) 
Sec. 58-45. - Enforcement. 
(a) The county clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes. The map shall be kept on file in the office of the county clerk and shall be available to the public. 
(b) The sheriff shall cause those roads upon which truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly signed and posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(Code 2000, § 58-69; Ord. No. 88-2, § III, 9-6-1988) 
Sec. 58-46. - Violations. 
Any person violating a provision of this article shall be tried in the probate court of the county and upon conviction shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 2000, § 58-70; Ord. No. 88-2, § IV, 9-6-1988) 
Appendix A - SUBDIVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's subdivisions ordinance, as adopted by the board of commissioners on July 10, 2007. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. (Back)
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AND JURISDICTION 

Sec. 1-1. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of Ben Hill County, Georgia." 
Sec. 1-2. - Purpose. 
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as amended, for the following purposes: 
a. To encourage economically sound and stable land development.
b. To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
c. To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
d. To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
e. To assure that land is developed in conformity with the comprehensive plan for Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 1-3. - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall govern all subdivision of land within the unincorporated area of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 