SECTION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be defined as follows: 

Sec. 2-1. - Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation or association. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Sec. 2-2. - Accessory building. 
[Accessory building means] a detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal structure or use of the land; and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use, including residential swimming pools. 
Sec. 2-3. - Administrator, zoning. 
[Zoning administrator means] the person, officer or official and his authorized representative, whom the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners has designated as its agent for the administration of this ordinance. (See section 11-1.) 
Sec. 2-4. - Agriculture. 
[Agriculture means] the production, keeping or maintenance, for commercial purposes, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops, grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats, or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. Retail selling of products raised on the premises shall be considered a normal accessory activity provided that space adequate for the parking of customers' vehicles shall be provided off the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 2-5. - Boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
[Boardinghouse or roominghouse means] a building dedicated to the lodging or feeding, or both, of five or more nontransient persons or separate families as defined herein for compensation. 
Sec. 2-6. - Buffer area; buffer strip. 
[Buffer area or buffer strip means] a landscaped open area and/or screened area designed to separate incompatible uses. 
Sec. 2-7. - Building. 
[Building means] any structure, including mobile homes as defined herein but not including accessory trailers, which has a roof and which is for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Sec. 2-8. - Building height. 
[Building height means] the vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Sec. 2-9. - Club, lodge, private. 
[Private club or lodge means] an incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Sec. 2-10. - Care home. 
[Care home means] an orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
Sec. 2-11. - Condominium. 
[Condominium means] a building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 2-12. - Curb cut. 
[Curb cut means] the providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Sec. 2-13. - Density. 
[Density means] the overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential areas, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. 
Sec. 2-14. - Dwelling, single-family. 
[Single-family dwelling means] a detached building used and either designed or constructed for one dwelling unit. 
Sec. 2-15. - Dwelling, single-family attached. 
[Single-family attached dwelling means] one of a series of two or more single-family dwelling units built on separate lots attached to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot by a common party wall. 
Sec. 2-16. - Dwelling, mobile home. 
Mobile home or manufactured home is a detached structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. 
Sec. 2-17. - Dwelling, two-family, or duplex. 
[Two-family dwelling or duplex means] a building either designed, constructed, altered or used for two adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire rated common wall, and/or if two stories in height, by a fire rated common floor. 
Sec. 2-18. - Dwelling, three-family, or triplex. 
[Three-family dwelling or triplex means] a building either designed, constructed, altered or used for three adjoining dwelling units that are connected by a fire-rated common wall or walls, or if more than one story in height, by a fire-rated floor or floors. 
Sec. 2-19. - Dwelling, multifamily. 
[Multifamily dwelling means] a building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for more than three adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums or any other type of multifamily structure. 
Sec. 2-20. - Dwelling unit. 
[Dwelling unit means] an enclosure of one or more rooms, including kitchen and bathroom facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one family. 
Sec. 2-21. - Family. 
[Family means] one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, hotel, or fraternity or sorority house. 
Sec. 2-22. - Farm. 
[Farm means] a tract of land at least five acres in size devoted to agricultural purposes. ([See] section 2-4.) 
Sec. 2-23. - Farmer's market. 
[Farmer's market means] a public marketplace, designed to serve area farmers, where provisions are sold at retail and wholesale. 
Sec. 2-24. - Floor area, gross. 
[Gross floor area means] the total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, attic, porches, carports and garages. 
Sec. 2-25. - Home occupation. 
[Home occupation means] an occupation for gain or support customarily conducted on the premises by a person or family residing therein. (See sections 9-1 and 9-2.) 
Sec. 2-26. - Hospital. 
[Hospital means] any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of senile psychotics or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Sec. 2-27. - Junkyard. 
[Junkyard means the] use of property for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk, including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Sec. 2-28. - Kennels. 
[Kennels means] the housing of four or more dogs. 
Sec. 2-29. - Lot. 
[Lot means] a lot of record, held in a single ownership by one person, or in common ownership by more than one, which has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and lot area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the use proposed for the tract of land. (See section 3-21.) 
Sec. 2-30. - Lot, corner. 
[Corner lot means] a lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. (See section 3-11.) 
Sec. 2-31. - Lot of record. 
[Lot of record means] a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Ben Hill County, Georgia (of Irwin County or Wilcox County prior to the creation of Ben Hill County in 1907), or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance or a parcel described by metes and bounds or by a plat of survey prepared by a Georgia registered land surveyor, recorded subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], which meets the minimum requirements of this ordinance or is exempt from the county subdivision regulations. A parcel is described by metes and bounds if the description is contained in a recorded deed or a recorded plat to which the deed makes reference. 
Sec. 2-32. - Lot, through. 
[Through lot means] a lot other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street; or a corner lot having frontage on three or more streets. 
Sec. 2-33. - Lot width. 
[Lot width means] the distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 2-34. - Nursery school. 
[Nursery school means] an agency, organization or individual providing daytime care of six or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. 
Sec. 2-35. - Open space. 
[Open space means] that required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways or off-street parking but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
Sec. 2-36. - Personal care home. 
[Personal care home means] a building or group of buildings, a facility or place in which is provided two or more beds and other facilities and services, including room, meals and personal care for nonfamily ambulatory adults for compensation. 
2-36.1. Family personal care home means a home for adults in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons. 
2-36.2. Group personal care home means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
2-36.3. Congregate personal care home means a home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
Sec. 2-37. - Planning commission. 
As utilized in this ordinance, the planning commission shall mean the Fitzgerald/Ben Hill County Planning Commission as duly appointed by the Fitzgerald Mayor and Council and the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 2-38. - Principal building. 
[Principal building means] the building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
Sec. 2-39. - Principal use. 
[Principal use means] the principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
Sec. 2-40. - Public street. 
[Public street means the] right-of-way dedicated to the city or county or owned by the city, county, state or federal government for public street purposes. 
Sec. 2-41. - Setback. 
[Setback means] the shortest distance between the centerline of a street and the principal building or structure on a lot. 
Sec. 2-42. - Shopping center. 
[Shopping center means] two or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
Sec. 2-43. - Sign. 
[Sign means] any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure, including billboard or poster panel, designed to carry the above visual information. 
2-43.1. Advertising separate use sign [means] a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
2-43.2. Advertising incidental use sign [means] a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered as a minor and incidental activity upon the premises where the sign is displayed. 
2-43.3. Bulletin board [means] a sign used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a church, community recreation center, school, auditorium, library, museum or similar noncommercial places of public assembly. 
2-43.4. Identification sign [means] a sign used to identify only the name of the individual, family, organization or enterprise occupying the premises. 
2-43.5. Point of business sign [means] a sign which directs attention to a business, profession or industry located upon the premises where the sign is displayed, to type of products sold, manufactured or assembled, and/or to service or entertainment offered on said premises, but not a sign pertaining to the preceding if such activity is only minor and incidental to the principal use of the premises. 
Sec. 2-44. - Special exception. 
A special exception is a use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the zoning board of appeals after said board has: 
(1) Reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the county, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; 
(2) Has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and
(3) Has approved the use as specified. (See sections 5 and 12-6.2.)
Sec. 2-45. - Structure. 
[Structure means] anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools and fallout shelters but do not include walls or fences. 
Sec. 2-46. - Tourist home. 
[Tourist home means] a dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided to transient visitors for compensation. 
Sec. 2-47. - Trailer, travel type. 
[Travel type trailer means] a vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a camper or travel trailer. 
Sec. 2-48. - Variance. 
A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional standards or development requirements of the zoning ordinance that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the intentional actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the requirements would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. (See section 12-6.3.) 
Sec. 2-49. - Yard, front. 
[Front yard means] that area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. (See illustration.) 
Sec. 2-50. - Yard, rear. 
[Rear yard means] that area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. (See illustration.) 
Sec. 2-51. - Yard, side. 
[Side yard means] that area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard. (See illustration.) 

SECTION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or otherwise agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 3-2. - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3-3. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance except as provided in sections 9-3 and 9-4 and section 3-21. 
Sec. 3-4. - Only one principal building per lot. 
Except as herein provided (see section 9-3 and section 9-4), there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
Sec. 3-5. - Open space not to be encroached upon. 
No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking space requirements, and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs and planted buffer strips shall be interpreted not to be encroachments of yards. (See section 3-24.) 
Sec. 3-6. - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure or use except as provided in section 7-6. 
Sec. 3-7. - Reduction of yards or lot area. 
Except as provided in section 3-21, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], and no lot hereafter created, shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located, unless: 
(1) Said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use; or 
(2) Said tract of land is, when considered together with an adjoining lot with identical ownership, sufficient to satisfy said minimum dimension or area requirements. 
Sec. 3-8. - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No building, structure, service area or required off-street parking and loading facility, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 3-9. - Location of accessory buildings or uses. 
Accessory buildings on residential lots, when located within a front or side yard, shall be located no closer to property lines than would be allowed for a principal building. Within a rear yard, an accessory building on a residential lot shall be located at least five feet from all rear property lines and eight feet from all other property lines, except that in the case of corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the centerline of an abutting street right-of-way a distance equal to three-fourths the front yard setback established for the zoning district in which the accessory buildings are located. In the case of a through lot (see section 3-11), accessory buildings shall conform to front yard setbacks on both streets. Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such buildings or uses are located. 
3-9.1. Accessory building on separate lot. An accessory building may be permitted, as a special exception by the zoning board of appeals, on a separate lot from the lot of the principal building provided that: 
(a) The lot upon which the accessory building is to be located shall be within 400 feet of the principal use; 
(b) All requirements, including use restrictions, established for the zoning district in which such accessory building is to be located shall be complied with; and 
(c) Any structure or building erected shall meet the requirements of the Ben Hill County Building Code and shall be approved by the building inspector [building official]. 
In addition to the above requirements, the board of appeals may require design features such as buffer strips, screening, etc., as may be found necessary to protect the purposes of this ordinance. 
3-9.2. Swimming pools. Swimming pools accessory to residences or commercial uses shall be enclosed by a steel mesh security fence or other substantial building material affording equal or better access control. Said fence shall have a minimum height of four feet. 
3-9.3. Separation from principal use. Any accessory building of more than eight feet in height shall be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
Sec. 3-10. - Every lot shall abut a street. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut an open public street, unless the owner of the lot also owns land, or a recorded access easement over lands, which connects said lot to an open public street. 
Sec. 3-11. - Lots with multiple frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the centerline of the street right-of-way shall equal to 75 percent of that required for the front yard setback for the respective zoning district. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this ordinance to interpret the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a through lot having frontage on two or more roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
Sec. 3-12. - Visibility at intersections. 
On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery or other obstruction to the traffic sight vision, except utility poles or light or sign standards, shall exceed a height of three feet within a triangular area formed by the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets or a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way line, and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-way lines at two points, each 20 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, or, in the case of a rounded corner, from the point of intersection of their tangents; provided, however, signs, lights, or similar objects which are totally located at least 12 feet above the finished grade shall be permitted. (See illustration.) 

Sec. 3-13. - Uses prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district, either as a matter of right or as a special exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses shall be prohibited in such district. 
Sec. 3-14. - Fallout and/or storm shelters. 
Fallout and/or storm shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses in any district, subject to the yard requirements of the district. Shelters shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or blight to the community. 
The zoning board of appeals may permit, as a special exception, construction of joint shelters by two or more property owners. Where such joint shelters are permitted, the board may waive the side and rear yard setback requirements on the property or properties directly involved in order to permit practical and efficient location and construction; provided, however, that side and rear yard requirements shall be met where property involved in a joint proposal abuts or adjoins property not included in the proposal. 
Sec. 3-15. - Zoning to apply when lot is divided by district boundary line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may extend a use allowed on either portion of said lot 50 feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
Sec. 3-16. - Height limitations of walls and fences. 
Within any residential district, no wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height within or along a boundary of a rear or side yard. Within the front yard, all fences shall have a height limit of four feet. 
Sec. 3-17. - Required buffers in P, CC, GB, WLI and H-I districts. 
In a P, CC, GB, WLI, and H-I zoning district, where a lot abuts any residential district, a six-foot-wide buffer the entire length of the lot abutting the residential property shall be provided with screening as specified in section 3-19. Off-street parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
Sec. 3-18. - Screening of service areas within 150 feet of public street. 
Any service area, loading area, refuse or storage area between a principal building and a public street being visible from said street and lying within 150 feet of said street shall be screened from view from the public street as specified in section 3-19. 
Sec. 3-19. - Screening required. 
Wherever screening is required by this ordinance, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient opacity to provide a visual blind, designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such fences and walls shall be at least six feet in height, but no greater than eight feet in height, measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than three years from the time of planting. The owner/developer shall install the screening prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Occupancy will not be allowed until the screening is completed as a part of the normal development requirements. 
Sec. 3-20. - Side and rear yards not required next to railroad. 
Within any nonresidential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
Sec. 3-21. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], which has an area or a width which is less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in that zone; provided, however, that the same yard, setback, open space, and other dimensional requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot, except as stipulated in section 3-25. 
Sec. 3-22. - Permitted modification of setback requirement. 
When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this ordinance, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: 
(1) Where only one said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a nonconforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of: 
(a) The normal setback requirement; with
(b) The nonconforming setback; or
(2) Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a nonconforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two nonconforming setbacks. 
Sec. 3-23. - Structures permitted above the height limit. 
The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, [or to a] monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smokestack, conveyor, flagpole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roofline of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. 
(Code 2000, § A-3-23) 
Sec. 3-24. - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles; provided, however, that in the case of automobile service stations, motels and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkways within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 3-25. - Modification of side yard requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located, then the zoning administrator shall be authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot; provided, however, that there shall not be less than an eight-foot side yard. 
SECTION 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4-1. - Establishment of districts. 
In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in section 1 may be accomplished, there are hereby established within Ben Hill County, Georgia, zoning districts identified as follows: 
4-1.1. G-F general farming. The purpose of this district is to permit agricultural uses, to encourage the maintenance of the rural countryside, to preserve forests and other undeveloped lands away from areas of population growth, and to allow residents to retain their traditional ways of life. The preferred land use in the district is agricultural, either active in the form of crops, or passive in the form of forest management or pasture lands. The G-F district should be utilized as a land use designation where a more intensive use of the land is unlikely to occur in the near future. The requirements of the district are designed to encourage the maintenance of a rural character until more intensive development is feasible. 
4-1.2. R-1 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide for residential areas restricted to a [sic] single-family uses with a minimum lot size of one acre, these areas being protected from the depreciating effects of higher density development and the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible with a low-density residential development. With health department approval, such districts may use individual water and sewage disposal systems. 
4-1.3. R-15 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 15,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.4. R-9 single-family residential. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 9,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.5. R-6 residential. The purpose of this district is to provide residential areas with a minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet, said areas being protected from uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.6. M-R multiple residential. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of higher density residential areas for one-, two-, three-family and multifamily dwellings, with minimum lot sizes of 6,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. 
4-1.7. R-6-M residential. The purpose of this district is to create an area that, in addition to conventional housing, allows mobile homes as a matter of right in a conventional subdivision. Lots in this district must have a minimum of 6,000 square feet. These districts shall be protected from the encroachment of incompatible uses which are detrimental to a sound residential environment. 
4-1.8. MHP mobile home park. The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of property that is located and planned for mobile home use. Property developed in this district is to remain under single ownership for rental purposes only. Mobile home parks shall be developed only in strict accordance with the mobile home park provisions of this ordinance. 
4-1.9. P professional. The purpose of this district shall be to create an area in which residential, professional, educational and institutional uses can be compatibly mixed while maintaining a healthful living environment for the residents of the district and at the same time preventing the development of blight and slum conditions. The minimum lot size in this district shall be 6,000 square feet. 
4-1.10. C-C community commercial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect convenient areas for county shopping facilities consisting of a wide variety of sales and service. 
4-1.11. G-B general business. The purpose of this district shall be to provide for and encourage the proper grouping and development of uses which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the county and the traveling public in order to reduce highway traffic congestion, traffic hazards and blight along the public streets of the county. 
4-1.12. WLI wholesale-light industrial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those wholesale and light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
4-1.13. H-I heavy industrial. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the requirements of the WLI district. 
Sec. 4-2. - Zoning map and major thoroughfare plan. 
The boundaries of each district are shown on maps entitled "Zoning District Map[s] of Ben Hill County, Georgia." The classification of streets (local and collector streets and principal and minor arterials) within Ben Hill County, Georgia, are shown on maps entitled "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Street and Road Classifications Plan, Ben Hill County, Georgia." All maps shall be dated and certified by the chairman of the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners and the county clerk, and said maps and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this ordinance. 
Accurate copies of the "Zoning District Maps of Ben Hill County, Georgia," and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Street and Road Classifications, Ben Hill County, Georgia," shall be on file in the office of the zoning administrator at all times. Said map[s] shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to ensure that the "Zoning District Maps of Ben Hill County, Georgia," and the "Major Thoroughfare Plan, Street and Road Classifications, Ben Hill County, Georgia," displayed in his office are kept up-to-date and accurately show all amendments. 
Sec. 4-3. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Zoning District Maps of Ben Hill County," the following rules shall apply: 
4-3.1. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the centerline of a street right-of-way, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed or river bed, such centerlines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be interpreted as following such lot lines. 
4-3.3. Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as approximately following the corporate limit lines, then such corporate limit lines shall be interpreted to be such district boundaries. 
4-3.4. Where district boundaries are indicated on the zoning map as being set back from the centerline of a street right-of-way, road, highway, railroad, stream or river, and parallel thereto, then such district boundaries, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be interpreted as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of such street, road, highway, railroad, stream, or river as being parallel thereto. 
Sec. 4-4. - Use interpretation. 
The use provisions of section 5 of this ordinance shall govern the use of all properties, regardless of any inconsistency or conflicting provision of section 4. 
SECTION 5. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 5-1. - Table of permitted uses. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning District Maps of Ben Hill County," no building, structure or land shall be constructed, erected, altered or used except as indicated in the following schedules: 
5-1.1. Uses permitted by right. Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.2. Special exception. Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the zoning board of appeals are indicated on the following schedule by the letters "SE" in the appropriate column. 
5-1.3. Uses not allowed. Uses not specifically designated by an "X" or "SE" within the appropriate column are not allowed within the district. 

 
SECTION 6. - SETBACK, FLOOR AREA, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 

Sec. 6-1. - Development standards. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of Ben Hill County, Georgia," no building or structure, excluding all signs other than the advertising signs, shall be constructed or erected except as indicated in the following schedule. 

 
1 Plus half any amount which the R/W width exceeds 60 feet for local streets, 80 feet for collector streets, and 100 feet for principal and minor arterials. 
2 The minimum distance from all other property lines to any building over 35 feet in height shall be increased one foot for every two feet (or part of two feet) of building height greater than 35 feet. 
3 800 square feet for each unit (two-bedroom or larger); 600 square feet for each one bedroom unit (not to exceed 25 percent of project); 400 square feet for each efficiency unit (not to exceed 25 percent of project). 
4 If the adjoining yard is within any residential district, the yard requirements specified in this table shall be increased ten feet and screening shall be provided as specified in section 3-19 along the lot line common with said lot. 
SECTION 7. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 7-1. - Scope of provisions. 
Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements or use, a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
Sec. 7-2. - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
Sec. 7-3. - Drainage, construction and maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials which will assure [ensure] a surface resistant to erosion. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean, orderly and dustfree condition. 
Sec. 7-4. - Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets. 
All off-street parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
Sec. 7-5. - Parking area design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine feet and [a] length of 20 feet. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90-degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60-degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45-degree parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking. Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
Sec. 7-6. - Joint parking facilities. 
Two or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types, may provide joint facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Sec. 7-7. - Pavement markings and signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
Sec. 7-8. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure [ensure] a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not specifically mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses or structures shall be based upon the total development even if the existing use is deficient. These development requirements shall apply to all zoning districts. 

 
Sec. 7-9. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale and retail operations shall provide loading spaces as follows: 
7-9.1. Spaces appropriate to functions. Off-street loading space shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
7-9.2. Design of loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
7-9.3. Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 7-10. - Curb cut requirements. 
In any district as described below where the lowering or cutting away of curbs, or the placement of asphalt and/or driveway pipe on noncurbed sections for the purpose of ingress and egress is required to the property, such curb cuts or asphalt width shall be placed through the entire right-of-way and shall be subject to the following provisions: 
7-10.1. Residential curb cuts. R-1, R-15, R-9, R-6, M-R, R-6-M and P zoning areas (excluding multifamily, residential group development projects and mobile home park development): 
7-10.1.1. No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed any parcel of property, the front of which is less than 200 feet on any one street. Additional entrances or exits for parcels having a frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance/exit for each additional 100 feet. 
7-10.1.2. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curblines or such lines extended, or within 15 feet of the intersection of two property lines (right-of-way lines) or such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. On principal or minor arterials or collector streets, no driveway shall be within 70 feet of the intersection of two curblines or curblines extended. 
7-10.1.3. The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten feet. Said distance shall be measured between the point of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb. 
7-10.1.4. All driveways shall be constructed so as to have at least five feet from any front property line, excluding right-of-way, except that a curb return may become tangent to a curbline at a point where such property line extends with the curbline. 
7-10.1.5. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
7-10.1.6. The sum of the two curb return radii for any curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet.
7-10.1.7. When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk, if existing, shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, [and] fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed, and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural preexisting state. 
7-10.2. Commercial, industrial, mobile home park, and multifamily curb cuts. 
7-10.2.1. No more than two combined entrances or exits shall be allowed any parcel or frontage which is less than 300 feet on any one street. On parcels less than 150 feet, only one entrance shall be allowed provided it is a two-way driveway (two one-way driveways shall be allowed in lieu of the one two-way). Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of 300 feet shall be permitted at the rate of one entrance-exit for each additional 150 feet. 
7-10.2.2. No driveway shall be located closer than 150 feet of an existing driveway on an abutting lot. Existing lots of record less than 150 feet frontage shall be allowed one combined entrance/exit not to exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line. 
7-10.2.3. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curblines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines (right-of-way lines) where such lines extended, whichever is more restrictive. 
7-10.2.4. All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet from any property line, except that a curb return may become tangent to a curbline at a point where the property line extended intersects such curbline. 
7-10.2.5. Maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the right-of-way line; minimum two-way shall be 24 feet at right-of-way line with a maximum of 12.5-foot radius. No two driveways on the same property shall be closer than 25 feet. 
7-10.2.6. The maximum width of any curb cut in C-C, G-B, WLI, and H-I zones shall not exceed 35 feet at the right-of-way line. 
7-10.2.7. The sum of the two curb return radii for any one curb cut shall not be less than 25 feet, nor [or] greater than 40 feet. 
7-10.2.8. When development on sites where existing curb cuts are abandoned and access is no longer afforded due to parking lots, buildings or other permitted structures, the driveway shall be removed, the sidewalk, if existing, shall be replaced, the curb and gutter shall be replaced, [and] fill dirt backfilled to its natural state; where it is a piped driveway to a dirt or paved street, said pipe shall be removed, asphalt removed, and the shoulders and ditch regraded to its natural preexisting state. In addition to the abandonment requirements, when any new on-site construction totals 25 percent or more of the assessed value of the existing development, all site access shall be improved to current design standard. 
7-10.3. Residential group development curb cuts. 
7-10.3.1. No more than one combined entrance and exit shall be allowed any parcel of property, the total area of which is less than or equal to two acres. Additional entrances for parcels having areas greater than two acres will be granted at the rate of one combined entrance and exit per two acres. 
7-10.3.2. At street intersections (corner lots), no curb cuts shall be located within 70 feet of the intersection of two curblines or within 60 feet of the intersection of two property lines where such lines [are] extended, whichever is more restrictive. 
7-10.3.3. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
7-10.3.4. The sum of the two curb return radii for any one curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet.
7-10.3.5. All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least 12.5 feet from any property line, except that a curb return may become tangent to a curbline at a point where the property line extended intersects such curbline. 
SECTION 8. - NONCONFORMANCES 

Sec. 8-1. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Ben Hill County (or Irwin County prior to 1907) at the time of passage of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
a. Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
b. A lot to be used for duplexes, triplexes, multifamily dwellings, residential group development projects, or mobile homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
Sec. 8-2. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Nonconforming uses of land consists of the open use of property, including such uses but not limited to storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking [yards], junkyards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, mobile home parks and similar open uses, where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
a. When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
b. Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses.
c. A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
d. When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 8-3. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
Nonconforming uses of structures consists of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
a. An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic; creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes; is a more intensive use of structures than the existing nonconforming use; and is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
b. A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area or volume of space occupied by the use. 
c. When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. A passive use such as storage shall not be sufficient in and of itself to constitute the continuance of a nonconforming use. 
Sec. 8-4. - Nonconforming signs. 
Nonconforming signs shall be allowed to continue except as provided in sections 10-2.1 and 10-3 as follows: 
a. A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
b. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing repairs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
c. New point of business signs related to legally established nonconforming uses may be erected provided they comply with the sign regulations applicable to the use in the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted. 
Sec. 8-5. - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50 percent of the value of the structure. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
Sec. 8-6. - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], shall also be governed by the provisions of this section. 
SECTION 9. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

Sec. 9-1. - Rural home occupations. 
This provision is designed to provide for the reasonable development of rural home occupations as an accessory use to single-family residences. Uses of property for the rural home occupation shall be governed by the following requirements: 
9-1.1. Property for which an RHO is proposed shall be owner occupied and shall contain a minimum of two acres of land and shall be readily accessible to a principal or minor arterial or collector roadway as defined herein. 
9-1.2. The accessory structure for which such use is proposed shall contain no more than 75 percent of the gross square footage in the residential building. 
9-1.3. The accessory structure shall be located behind the residential structure and no closer than 20 feet from rear property lines and 30 feet from side property lines. All building code separation requirements shall apply. 
9-1.4. Any rural home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to not be a nuisance to adjacent residential structures. This shall apply to noise, lighting, traffic and unsightly outside storage. 
9-1.5. No display of products shall be allowed in the front yard.
9-1.6. Only one sign advertising the accessory use, not exceeding eight square feet in size, motionless and nonlighted, shall be permitted in the conduct of the proposed RHO use. 
9-1.7. Any business relating to or associated with an agricultural activity shall not be construed as a rural home occupation as defined by this ordinance. 
9-1.8. All businesses operating under this ordinance shall provide designated off-street parking to the rear of the primary residential structure for customers of said business. 
9-1.9. The use of an accessory building for retail or wholesale sale shall be limited to items manufactured, grown or processed on said premises. 
9-1.10. Any occupation that meets the intent of this ordinance may be considered for a special exception within a G-F district as described herein. This may include but is not limited to the following: Printing or engraving shop, flower shop, furniture upholstery shop, locksmith, personal service shops, photography studio, and specialty shops as they relate to the sale of items manufactured therein. 
Sec. 9-2. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be subject to the following requirements: 
9-2.1. At least one resident and not more than one nonresident of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. The resident must be the owner of the home occupation. 
9-2.2. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
9-2.3. No display of products shall be visible from the street, and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. 
9-2.4. Only one point-of-business sign, not exceeding two square feet in size, motionless, nonlighted, and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted; and no advertising signs shall be permitted. 
9-2.5. Use of the building for this purpose shall not exceed 25 percent of one floor of the principal building. 
9-2.6. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
9-2.7. The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood.
9-2.8. No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the occupation.
9-2.9. Instruction in music and similar subjects shall be limited to two students at a time.
9-2.10. Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
9-2.11. The following and similar uses may be considered home occupations provided that all additional requirements of this section are met: accountant, addressing service, answering service, architect, art instructor, barber or beauty shop (with no more than one chair), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent, and tax consultant. 
9-2.12. Not more than five children may be kept in the home as a nursery as a customary home occupation. (See definition of nursery school at [section] 2-34.) 
Sec. 9-3. - Residential group development projects. 
The requirements as set forth in this subsection shall apply to all lands and structures intended primarily to provide for owner occupied residential units, including condominiums, single-family attached dwelling units (with or without condominium ownership), patio homes, zero lot line, and other similar housing types. Multiple buildings may be allowed on a single lot in these development types. Residential group development projects are allowed subject to the following: 
9-3.1. A condominium is defined as a type of residential development which includes individually owned dwelling units in a multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the buildings and grounds. 
9-3.2. Single-family attached dwellings are a type of residential development which includes a dwelling unit on a subdivided lot individually owned, though attached by a common party wall to another dwelling unit on an adjacent lot. This housing type may also include provisions for joint ownership of common areas of certain buildings and grounds. 
9-3.3. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit proposed as a part of any residential group development project. 
9-3.4. Residential group development projects shall conform to the building height restrictions listed in section 6 of these regulations. 
9-3.5. Each dwelling unit proposed as part of a residential development project shall meet the minimum floor area requirements listed in section 6 of this ordinance, as well as limitations for efficiency and one-bedroom units as part of the total project development. 
9-3.6. No building containing single-family attached units shall contain more than ten units. There shall be a firewall with a four-hour rating between every unit. Each dwelling unit shall be serviced by separate utilities. 
9-3.7. Minimum lot area for all residential group development projects shall meet the minimum lot area requirements listed in section 6. 
9-3.8. The following minimum lot area shall be left in a natural state as open space or be developed as park and/or open air recreation facilities. Required yard areas shall not be credited towards this minimum open space allocation: 
9-3.8.a. Single-family attached dwelling units, 500 square feet per dwelling unit on all projects one acre and over. 
9-3.8.b. Condominium, 500 square feet per dwelling unit.
9-3.9. Applications for a building permit for all residential group development projects shall be subject to the provisions of section 11-3 of this ordinance. In addition, if the project proposes the subdivision of the tract into various individual lots and common area, a copy of the planned subdivision must be supplied to the zoning administrator. Said plat shall be properly reviewed by the Fitzgerald-Ben Hill County Planning Commission and recorded in the land records of Ben Hill County prior to granting of the respective building permit(s). 
9-3.10. Due to the design needs of this development type, standard lot sizes and interior setback lines shall not apply. However, zoning district mandated front, side and rear yard setbacks shall apply to all lots where these developments abut traditional development types or newly developed public streets. 
Sec. 9-4. - Multifamily development projects. 
Multifamily development projects are subject to the following: 
9-4.1. Multiple buildings may be allowed on a single lot in these development types.
9-4.2. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit proposed as part of any multifamily development project. 
9-4.3. Multifamily development projects shall conform to the building height restrictions and yard setback requirements listed in section 6 of this ordinance. 
9-4.4. Each dwelling unit proposed as part of a multifamily development project shall meet the minimum floor area requirements listed in section 6 of this ordinance, as well as limitations for efficiency and one-bedroom units as part of the total project development. 
9-4.5. All multifamily development projects shall leave 500 square feet per dwelling unit in a natural state as open space or be developed as park and/or open air recreation facilities. 
Sec. 9-5. - Mobile home parks. 
Mobile home parks are allowed provided the following requirements are met: 
9-5.1. The minimum size shall be five acres.
9-5.2. The park shall have minimum side yards of 20 feet, minimum rear yard of 20 feet, and a front yard of at least 20 feet greater than that required for other uses permitted in the district. 
9-5.3. Each mobile home shall be connected to an approved water and sewer system, subject to review and approval of the Ben Hill County Health Department. 
9-5.4. The minimum lot area per mobile home shall be not less than 4,000 square feet with a minimum stall width of 40 feet. 
9-5.5. The minimum distance between any two mobile homes or between any mobile home and any other building in the park shall be 20 feet. 
9-5.6. A 20-foot private drive, paved and properly drained, shall serve all mobile home stalls and be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public or private. 
9-5.7. Surfaced walkways having a minimum width of three feet shall be provided from all mobile home lots to all group facilities, garbage collection areas and mail pickup areas. 
9-5.8. Each mobile home lot shall be clearly defined by means of concrete, steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners. 
9-5.9. At least 200 square feet per mobile home lot, not to be a part of the required mobile home lot, shall be provided in one or more locations for community playground and recreation purposes. 
9-5.10. All property lines of a mobile home park which abut any zoning district other than another MHP district shall be screened as described in section 3-19 
9-5.11. No mobile home park shall be occupied by a greater number of mobile homes than that authorized in the approved building and occupancy permits. No mobile home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a separate building permit and a separate certificate of occupancy have been issued. 
9-5.12. Any new mobile home park is subject to review and approval of the Fitzgerald/Ben Hill County Planning Commission prior to approval of a building permit to ensure compliance with the aforementioned requirements. 
Sec. 9-6. - Rural farm housing. 
Dwelling units in a G-F district shall meet the following requirements: 
9-6.1. Only one single-family detached dwelling unit shall be permitted on any lot.
9-6.2. Each lot shall be so defined by permanent physical markers as to be given a numerical address and location designation. 
9-6.3. Each such lot shall receive approval from the appropriate county health authorities as to its suitability as a site for an effective sanitary disposal system designated to accommodate wastes generated by the user of the dwelling unit. 
9-6.4. An acceptable domestic water supply shall be available for use by the occupants of such dwelling unit, and such water supply shall meet all statutory and regulatory requirements as administered by county health authorities. 
9-6.5. Each lot shall meet the requirements of section 3-10 of this ordinance. 
9-6.6. An individual power supply source shall be provided to the dwelling, and the utility installation shall meet the standards as may now or hereafter be established by local authorities. 
9-6.7. The dwelling shall meet the requirements of local construction and use codes as may now or hereafter be established by the Ben Hill County Commission. 
9-6.8. A permit for construction of any such dwelling unit will not be issued prior to the approval of each of the aforementioned conditions by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 9-7. - Agricultural worker housing. 
Agricultural worker housing is allowed as an accessory use in the G-F (general farming) zoning district subject to the following provisions: 
9-7.1. All such housing shall meet applicable rules and regulations regarding agricultural worker housing of the Georgia Department of Labor. 
9-7.2. Water supply and sewage disposal for said housing shall be approved by the Ben Hill County Health Department. 
9-7.3. Such accessory uses shall be subject to the principal building front, rear and side yard setback requirements of the G-F (general farming) zoning district. 
9-7.4. All such structures or buildings developed for agricultural worker housing shall be limited to a maximum height of 35 feet and shall have a minimum of 30 feet of open, unoccupied space between it and any other building or structure in the development. 
SECTION 10. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to permit signs of a commercial nature in districts in which they are appropriate uses, and to regulate the size, density and placement of signs intended to be seen from a public right-of-way in the interest of highway safety and the general welfare. 
Sec. 10-2. - General provisions. 
All signs within the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be erected, constructed or maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section; and only those signs that are listed in this section shall be erected within the unincorporated areas of Ben Hill County. 
10-2.1. Traffic safety. No sign shall be erected or continued that:
a. Obstructs the sight distance along a public right-of-way.
b. Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals. 
c. Uses admonitions such as "stop," "go," "slow," "danger," etc., which might be confused with traffic directional signals. 
10-2.2. Construction prohibited. No sign shall be attached to or painted on any street, rock or other natural object; nor shall any sign be located on any public right-of-way. 
10-2.3. Density and setback requirements.
a. Signs which do not require a permit shall be at least ten feet from any right-of-way line or property line. 
b. Signs which require a permit:
1. Temporary, accessory and principal use signs shall be at least ten feet from any right-of-way line. 
2. Advertising separate use signs shall be set back for the district in which they are located, unless otherwise specified in this section. No permit shall be issued for any advertising separate use sign closer than 100 feet to any residential district, church, school, park, cemetery or premises used for governmental purposes, as measured along the same street to which the sign is oriented. 
Sec. 10-3. - Illumination not to be a nuisance. 
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, flood[lights] or spotlights shall be so placed and so shielded as to prevent the rays or illumination therefrom being cast into neighboring dwellings and approaching vehicles. 
Sec. 10-4. - Signs not requiring a permit. 
The following signs shall not require a permit: 
a. Signs to regulate traffic.
b. Signs required to be posted by law.
c. Warning signs and no trespassing signs.
d. Signs established by governmental agencies.
e. Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands, and similar transportation facilities.
f. Signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent or development, on private property. 
g. Temporary real estate signs less than 12 square feet in area advertising specific property for sale, lease, rent or development, on private property. 
h. Any sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area other than advertising separate use signs or signs requiring electrical wiring. 
i. Temporary signs on private land involved in campaigns of religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, political and similar organizations. 
Sec. 10-5. - Maximum area of signs. 
No freestanding sign shall be larger in area than 400 square feet. 
Sec. 10-6. - Issuance of permits. 
No sign, except those listed in section 10-4, shall be erected, hung, or placed or structurally altered without a permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall only issue a permit for the erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of [this] section 10 of this ordinance. 
10-6.1. Filing procedures. Application for permits to erect, hang or place a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the zoning administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by plans showing the area of the sign, size and character and the method of illumination, if any, and the exact location proposed for such sign; and in the case of a projecting sign, the proposed method of fastening said sign to the building structure, the vertical distance between such sign and the finished grade, and the horizontal distance between such sign and the street right-of-way. 
10-6.2. Additional information. Each applicant shall, upon the request [of the] zoning administrator, submit any additional information deemed necessary by said administrator. 
10-6.3. Temporary signs. If a temporary sign which does not require a permit is not intended to be left in place for a period to exceed six months, the owner may deposit a sum of $10.00 with the zoning administrator in lieu of the usual permit fee. If the sign is removed by the owner before the first day of the seventh month, the deposit shall be refunded in full; if not, the deposit shall be forfeited, and the zoning administrator shall remove said sign. 
SECTION 11. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 11-1. - Zoning administrator. 
An administrative official designated as the zoning administrator by the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance with due assistance from the county attorney and the appropriate magistrate's court personnel. When enacted by joint resolution by the mayor and council of the City of Fitzgerald and the board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, this administrative official may serve as joint zoning administrator for the City of Fitzgerald and Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 11-2. - Building permit required. 
A building permit, or a sign permit in case of a sign, issued by the zoning administrator is required except as hereinafter provided, in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, demolition or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. No building permit shall be required for the construction of an accessory structure, other than a sign, where the materials cost for the same does not exceed $500.00. 
Sec. 11-3. - Application for building permit. 
(a) All applications for building permits for multifamily dwellings, commercial and industrial structures, shall be accompanied by two site plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate (if applicable), the setback lines of the building on the permit lot, the various easements on the lot and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. The foregoing site plans shall include: 
(1) Topography;
(2) Drainage plans;
(3) Location and size of ingress/egress;
(4) Water and sewer mains and services, both existing and proposed; and
(5) Water and sewer services as well as fire hydrants in the lot and the specific meter size and location. 
(b) All applications for single-family, duplex and triplex residential uses shall be accompanied by two site plans that need not be drawn to scale but which show the proposed dwelling units, the setback lines of the building on the permit lot, and the location and size of the means of ingress and egress. 
(c) Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work of development is commenced; provided that extensions of time for periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed by the zoning administrator, provided the original permit was not issued prior to the enactment of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], and further provided that the zoning administrator determines that there has been no adverse change in conditions that would result in the rejection of the building permit had it been originally submitted at the time of the application for the extension of time. Any unapproved deviation from the site plan shall cause the zoning administrator not to issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(e)[(d)] Single-family, duplex, triplex, agricultural buildings and their accessory structures site plans need not be drawn to scale, but must be accurate as to dimensions of lot and proposed building. 
(f)[(e)] The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot which he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance [December 15, 1989], or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
Sec. 11-4. - Sign permits. 
The zoning administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this ordinance. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this ordinance in section 10. The zoning administrator shall process such sign applications and shall issue sign permits and sign permit numbers for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The Ben Hill County Zoning Administrator shall not issue a local sign permit for any signage subject to the review and approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation without documentary evidence of approval from the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Sec. 11-5. - Penalties for violation. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, altered, repaired, moved, converted or maintained, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the offender shall be guilty and upon conviction thereof be fined no more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. Each day of continued violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
Sec. 11-6. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator, county attorney, or other appropriate county authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or occupant who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use; or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land. 
Sec. 11-7. - Complaints regarding violations. 
When a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint with the zoning administrator. Such complaint shall state fully the causes and basis thereof and shall be filed with the zoning administrator. He shall record properly such complaint, investigate within 30 days and take action thereon as provided in this ordinance. 
Sec. 11-8. - Cancellation of permits. 
A demolition, building or sign permit shall be canceled by the zoning administrator when the method of demolition, construction or use violates any provision contained in this ordinance, or any state or local ordinance or resolution. Upon such cancellation, any further work upon the demolition, construction, alteration or repair on said building or structure, and any further use of said building or structure or land, shall be deemed a violation. Each and every day such unlawful demolition, construction, alteration or repair on said building or structure, or further use of said building or structure or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 11-9. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
11-9.1. Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the zoning administrator is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a. A building hereafter erected.
b. A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, the side, front or rear yard.
c. Any building or premises where a change in the type of use will occur.
d. All serving electrical utility agencies will require a copy of the certificate of occupancy prior to final connections of electrical services. 
11-9.2. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. Upon payment of all required fees, the zoning administrator shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and if the building, as finally constructed, substantially complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. One copy of all certificates of occupancy issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property and other pertinent information, signed by the owner or his agent, shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator. 
11-9.3. Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and substantially complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
Sec. 11-10. - Reason for denial of permit. 
When a permit is denied, the zoning administrator shall provide in writing, upon request of the applicant for a permit, his reasons for denying the permit within ten days after said request. 
Sec. 11-11. - Permits and licenses void when issued in conflict. 
Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this resolution shall be null and void. 
Sec. 11-12. - Appeals. 
Appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator with regard to interpretation, administration and enforcement shall be made to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of section 12. 
(Ord. of 12-15-89, § 11-12) 
SECTION 12. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 12-1. - Membership. 
12-1.1. Membership and appointment. The Fitzgerald/Ben Hill County Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the "board," shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of Ben Hill County. Two shall also be residents of the City of Fitzgerald, and one member shall also be an attorney who has been admitted to the Georgia Bar. The Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners shall appoint two members from the county, and the Fitzgerald City Council shall appoint two members from the city. The attorney shall be appointed by both governing bodies jointly. None of the board members shall hold any other public office, except that one member may also be a member of the planning commission. Board members may be removable for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Any member of the board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
12-1.2. Term of office. The term of office for each member of the board shall be for five years; however, in the appointment of the first board, three of the members shall be appointed for three years and two for five years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If one appointee be [is] from the planning commission and he ceases to be a member of said planning commission during the term of his appointment to the board, his membership on the board shall terminate and the governing authority may name a member of said planning commission to fill the unexpired term of its original appointee. 
12-1.3. Compensation. The board members shall receive no compensation for their service except that they may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenditures made in connection with their duties. 
Sec. 12-2. - Rules and procedures. 
The board shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board of appeals shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of [the City of] Fitzgerald or Ben Hill County, Georgia, or of the planning commission. The board shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as said board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of said board and shall be a public record. The decisions of the board shall be by resolution, which resolution shall contain a statement of the grounds of its decision or action. The full text of the resolution shall be sent to the appellant. No appeal requesting the same relief in regard to the same property shall be received or heard by the board for a period of 12 months following the date of said resolution, except that this limitation shall not affect the right of said board to grant a rehearing if provided in the rules of procedure adopted by said board. 
Sec. 12-3. - Administrative assistance. 
The Ben Hill [County] Board of Commissioners and Fitzgerald City Council may provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance as is needed by the board to carry out its function under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § A-12-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Appeals. 
12-4.1. Who may appeal. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the governing authority affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of notification of the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
12-4.2. Legal proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning administrator, and on due cause shown. 
12-4.3. Presentation of evidence. The appellant and any public agency or private individual shall be entitled to present evidence on matters before the board, and said board may request technical service, advice, data or factual evidence from the planning commission and the governing authority for assistance in reaching decisions. 
12-4.4. Extent of board of appeals' power. The board may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator. The board may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to carry out the decisions of the board. 
Sec. 12-5. - Public hearing. 
12-5.1. Notice of hearing shall be given. Before making its decision on any appeal, request for a special exception or request for a variance, said board shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant or petitioner, to the planning commission, the zoning administrator, and to the owners of all properties either adjoining the property with which the hearing is concerned or situated directly across a public right-of-way from said property. Such notice shall contain the name of the appellant or petitioner, the date, time and place set for the hearing, and a brief statement of the nature of the hearing. 
12-5.2. Public notice in newspaper. The board shall give a public notice of the hearing in a newspaper published and circulated in Fitzgerald, Georgia, by advertisement published at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
12-5.3. Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
12-5.4. Time limit on board's decision. The board shall reach a decision following a public hearing within ten days. 
Sec. 12-6. - Powers and duties. 
12-6.1. Appeals from actions of the zoning administrator. The board shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. 
12-6.2. Special exception. The board shall hear and decide upon special exceptions as authorized by section 5, "Schedule of Permitted Uses" (see section 12-5.1), of this ordinance. The application to establish such use shall be approved on a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a. The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose of this ordinance.
b. The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or the general neighborhood nor [or] affect adversely the health and safety of residents and workers. 
c. The proposed use will not constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use such facility, vehicular movement, noise or fumes generation, or type of physical activity. 
d. The proposed use will not be affected adversely by the existing uses of adjacent properties; and the proposed use will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of said use. 
e. The parking and all development standards set forth for each particular use for which a permit may be granted will be met. 
f. Provided that the board of appeals may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.) as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood; and provided that wherever the board of appeals shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any term, condition or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
g. Special exceptions granted by the board shall be valid for a period of 12 months from date of approval, shall not be transferable except upon written approval of the board, [and] shall be executed within the grant period or become null and void and subject to procedures for resubmission as hereinabove established. 
12-6.3. Request for a variance. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this resolution in the district in question. Such variance may be granted in an individual case upon finding by the board that all of the following exists: 
a. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
b. The application of this ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
c. Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and
d. Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance; provided that no variance may be granted for a use of land, building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance. Applications for use variances shall not be accepted by the zoning administrator. Such requests shall be properly filed as requests for rezoning, the authority for such rezoning of property being solely reserved for the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
e. Provided that the board of appeals may impose or require such additional restrictions and standards (i.e., increased setbacks, buffer strips, screening, etc.) as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of residents and workers in the community, and to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhood. Provided, that whenever the board of appeals shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, said board shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing. 
12-6.4. Request for extension of nonconforming uses. The board may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension or replacement of an existing nonconforming residential use which the board is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this resolution. Said extension may be granted in an individual case upon finding by the board that: 
a. The use is a nonconforming use as defined in these regulations; and
b. The use is in full compliance with all requirements of this ordinance applicable to nonconforming uses; and 
c. The extension of said use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property in the same district. 
Sec. 12-7. - Forms. 
Appeals, requests for permission to establish a use requiring special exception approval, requests for variances, and requests for extension of a nonconforming use shall be made on forms provided therefor; and all information required on said forms shall be provided by the appellant. Forms shall be filed with the zoning administrator, and the appellant shall pay the zoning administrator for expenses incidental to the appeal. No form shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee to defray expenses. 
SECTION 13. - ZONING DECISIONS AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 13-1. - General conditions. 
This ordinance, including the zoning map, may be amended by the county commission on their own motion, on petition, or on recommendation of the planning commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the governing authority shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this section. 
Sec. 13-2. - Application for amendment. 
13-2.1. General. Applications for amendment of this ordinance may be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of this ordinance or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Applications for amendment shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include a fee, set by the county commission, payable to the county, to defray expenses. No application for a zoning change affecting the same parcel of property or part thereof shall be accepted by the zoning administrator until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of a rezoning request by the county commission. 
13-2.2. Signature of applicant required. All applications shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state his name and address. 
13-2.3. Application for text amendment. In the case of a text amendment, the application shall set forth the text to be added and the existing text to be deleted. 
13-2.4. Application for map amendment. An application for a map amendment shall include the following information: 
a. The community or area in which is located the land proposed to be reclassified and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public roads in common use; 
b. A plat of the land in question, and a description by metes and bounds, bearings and distances of the land; or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which a plat is recorded in the land records of the county; then the lot, block and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; 
c. The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such land and a statement as to the proposed use of the property; 
d. The name and address of the owners of the land;
e. The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one or more; 
f. If the applicant has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the applicant's application for a map amendment, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more or made gifts having in the aggregate a value of $250.00 or more to the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners, any member of the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners, or a member of the Fitzgerald-Ben Hill County Planning Commission, it shall be the duty of the applicant and the attorney representing the applicant to disclose the following in the application: 
1) The name of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
2) The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the map amendment and the date of each such contribution; and 
3) An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the map amendment; 
4) In the event that no such gift or contributions were made, the application shall affirmatively so state. 
g. The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
13-2.5. Exclusions. The provisions of subsections 13-2.1 through 13-2.4 shall not be applicable to amendments of this ordinance, including the zoning map, initiated by the planning commission or the mayor and council [chairman and board of commissioners]. 
Sec. 13-3. - Referral to planning commission. 
Within five days after the routine monthly application acceptance deadline, the zoning administrator shall transmit two copies of the rezoning application to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report to the county commission. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within 30 days, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the requested amendment. The passage of a motion to table or a postponement to a specific time shall constitute a decision for the purposes of this section. Upon receipt of the planning commission report or upon the expiration of said 30-day period, whichever occurs first, a public hearing shall be scheduled regarding such application. 
Sec. 13-4. - Posting of property. 
Not less than 15 days prior to the date set for the public hearing on any application for a map amendment, other than a map amendment initiated by the planning commission or county commission, the zoning administrator shall erect a sign on the land proposed to be reclassified. Such sign shall be erected by the applicant within ten feet of whatever boundary line of such land abuts the most traveled public road; and, if no public road abuts thereon, then such sign shall be erected to face in such a manner as may be most readily seen by the public. The sign shall show the application number, if any, the present zoning classification, and the scheduled date, time and place of public hearing. If the land sought to be reclassified lies within more than one block as shown on a plat recorded in the land records of the county, then a sign shall be erected on the land in each such block. The zoning administrator shall verify the posting of a sign upon said property in accordance with these provisions. Any such sign shall be maintained on property at all times by the zoning administrator until a decision on the application has been made by the county commission. 
Sec. 13-5. - Hearing procedures. 
13-5.1. Hearing called. Before taking action on a proposed amendment, the county commission shall hold a public hearing. At least 15 but not more than 45 days' notice of the time, place and purpose of said hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Ben Hill County. Such notice shall contain a summary of the proposed amendment, if a text amendment, and in the case of a map amendment, the legal description and location of the property, its area, the name of the owner or their authorized agent, and the present and proposed zoning classification for the property affected. Such notice, with respect to text or map amendments initiated by the planning commission or county commission, shall state the time and place of the hearing, the purpose of the hearing, and that the proposed text or map amendment is described in documents available for public inspection during business hours in the office of the zoning administrator. 
13-5.2. Notice to interested parties. A notice shall be given to the applicant and the planning commission of the date, time and place of the public hearing. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator and be open to public inspection during regular office hours. 
13-5.3. Public hearing procedure. All public hearings on zoning matters shall be placed on the county commission agenda under a section entitled "Public Hearings." After an initial presentation of a specific zoning request by the planning commission or their designated staff, citizen comments will be heard in an orderly fashion. The county commission chairman or vice-chairman will ask for those citizens speaking in favor of the request first, followed by those opposed to the issue. All speakers will be asked to provide his or her name and address for the public record. Citizens are requested to keep their comments as brief as possible so that all who wish to be heard will have adequate time. When there are a large number of citizens wishing to testify at a given hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limitations on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. Citizens may address their comments to the county commission as a whole. Individual attacks or cross examination of a commission member, city or county employees or other citizens will be ruled out of order. After all citizens' comments have been received, all further discussion of the specific application is reserved for the county commission. The commission retains the privilege to ask any questions of staff or any citizen present for clarification. The commission will then render a decision on the application. The passage of a motion to table or a postponement to a specific time shall constitute a decision for the purpose of this section. 
13-5.4. Standards for exercise of zoning powers. In order to promote the public health, safety, morality and general welfare of Ben Hill County against the unrestricted use of property, the following standards, and any other factors relevant to balancing the above-stated public interest, will be considered, when deemed appropriate, by the county commission in making any zoning decision: 
a. The existing land use pattern;
b. The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts;
c. The existing population density pattern and the possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities; 
d. Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed amendment reasonable; 
e. Whether the proposed change will adversely influence existing conditions in the neighborhood or the community at large; 
f. Potential impact on the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, and water quality and quantity; 
g. The reasonableness of the costs required of the public in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and public safety necessities when considering the proposed changes; 
h. Whether the proposed change will be detrimental to the value or improvement of development of adjacent or nearby property in accordance with existing requirements; 
i. Whether the proposed change is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or Ben Hill County; 
j. Whether the proposed change will constitute a grant of special privilege to the individual owner as contrasted with the adjacent or nearby neighborhood or with the general public; and 
k. The extent to which the zoning decision is consistent with local planning efforts, if any, of Ben Hill County. 
13-5.5. Public hearings records standards. The county commission shall mechanically record the proceedings of all zoning public hearings. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party, who must arrange at his expense for a certified court reporter to record and transcribe the hearing and furnish the original of the transcript to the commission for its records. The record of public hearings and all evidence (e.g., maps, drawings, traffic studies, etc.) submitted at the public hearing shall be noted as such and shall become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
SECTION 14. - DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, BOARD OF APPEALS, COUNTY COMMISSION AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Zoning administrator. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that the zoning administrator be chiefly responsible, with due assistance from the county attorney, for all questions of interpretation of this ordinance. The zoning administrator shall also be responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Sec. 14-2. - Zoning board of appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall review questions on interpretation only on appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator, and recourse from all decisions of the board shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
Sec. 14-3. - County commission. 
It is further the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the county commission shall be to adopt or reject proposed amendments to this ordinance as detailed in section 13. Matters of nonenforcement of this ordinance may be brought to the county commission's attention by aggrieved parties only after the aggrieved party has followed the complaint procedure outlined in section 11-7. Corrections to problems of nonenforcement shall be handled by the county commission through the county administrator. Recourse from all decisions of the county commission shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
SECTION 15. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15-1. - Conflict with other laws. 
All previous zoning ordinances of Ben Hill County, Georgia, are hereby repealed. All ordinances or parts of ordinances not specifically in conflict herewith are hereby continued in force and effect, but all such ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require greater restrictions than those required by this ordinance, such ordinances or parts of ordinances shall govern. Whenever other ordinances or parts of ordinances require lesser restrictions, the requirements herewithin shall govern. 
Sec. 15-2. - Separability. 
If any section, clause, portion or provision of this ordinance is found unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this ordinance. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2000 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2000 Code, as updated through December 17, 2010, which are included herein. Sections of the 2000 Code, as updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions which are included herein. Ordinances and resolutions not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 