Sec. 1-4. - Applicability. 
These regulations establish minimum subdivision design standards for Ben Hill County, Georgia and the processes for obtaining approval of same. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2-1. - General. 
When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is always mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural, and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
Abutting property. Any property that is immediately adjacent or contiguous to property proposed to be subdivided or that is located immediately across any road or public right-of-way. 
Alleys. A public right-of-way, not intended to be a vehicular arterial or to provide the primary means of access to abutting property, but used for service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting a public street. 
Appeal. The process by which an aggrieved party may petition for review of a decision made by an official or department of county government. 
Applicant. Any person who submits subdivision plans to the county for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof. 
Building line. A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang, walkways, and the subsurface projection of footings; provided, however, that such overhang does not exceed six feet and does not encroach upon the adjacent property or right-of-way. 
Capital Improvements Program. A proposed schedule of all future governmental projects duly approved in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. 
Chairman. The Chairman of the Greater Ben Hill County Planning Commission. 
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan for Ben Hill County, Georgia, adopted by the county board of commissioners, which may consist of the major thoroughfare plan, general land use plan, street and road classification plan, and other maps, data, and descriptive matter for the physical development of the county or any portions thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto as adopted by the county commission. 
Ben Hill County Health Department. The Ben Hill County Board of Health, the Ben Hill County Health Department and/or the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources. The words "Ben Hill County Health Department" and/or "Ben Hill County Environmental Officer" are used in this ordinance to denote the fact that all matters pertaining to health regulations shall be directed to that official or his staff. 
County. Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
County commission. The Board of Commissioners of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 
County engineer. A public official appointed by the board of commissioners who has specialized training in engineering and is registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
Crosswalk. A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use for pedestrian use only and so designed as to provide access to adjacent streets or lots. 
Cul-de-sac. A local street having only one end open for access to another street, the other end being terminated by a turnaround as specified in this ordinance. 
Developer. Same as Subdivider. 
Development. The act or process of erecting buildings, structures, or of making improvements to property, or laying out and dividing land. 
Easement. A grant by the owner of land for the use of such land by others, including public usage, for a specific purpose or purposes (i.e., drainage easements and water and sewer easements). 
Floodprone area. An area identified as having a potential flood hazard pursuant to the Ben Hill County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, as amended. 
Guarantee. A maintenance bond, in the amount of 30 percent, required by this ordinance, which guarantees to Ben Hill County all materials and workmanship of any minimum improvements installed in a subdivision. 
Improvement plan. The second stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described in section 4-2 of this ordinance. For the purpose of the enforcement of this ordinance, the improvement plan must include the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and land disturbance program. 
Land characteristics. A soils inventory of the area proposed for development. The inventory will include a soils map and identification of soil types. The health department requires an intensive soils inventory prepared by a soil scientist. 
Lot. A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded, prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
Lot area, gross. The gross lot area is the area encompassed by the property lines of the lot. 
Lot area, usable. The usable lot area is the area within the property lines not covered by roads, access easements, prescriptive right-of-way, wetlands, or water. 
Lot area, required. The required lot area shall be the area computed as usable lot area as defined in paragraph 2-22.3. 
Lot frontage. The distance measured along the right-of-way between the side lot lines. Frontage shall be not less than half the required width at the building line. 
Lot, corner. A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two (2) or more streets. 
Lot width. The distance measured straight between the side lot lines, measured at the intersection of the building line, which shall be parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Official road classification map (major thoroughfare plan). The present and future functions of the roads of Ben Hill County are classified on a map entitled Official Road Classification Map of Ben Hill County, Georgia, and certified by the chairman of the Ben Hill County Commission. 
MSL. Mean sea level. 
Performance bond. A legal instrument made payable to the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners, which a developer may post with Ben Hill County to permit recording of a final plat prior to completion of the required minimum improvements. 
Planning commission. The Greater Ben Hill County Planning Commission, as duly appointed by its respective member governments. 
Plat. A map, generally of a subdivision, showing the location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties. 
a. Plat, preliminary. The first stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described in section 4-1 of this ordinance. 
b. Plat, final. The final stage of plat or subdivision plan review, as described in section 4-3 of this ordinance. 
Private road. A private access right-of-way for vehicular and pedestrian use which is designed and constructed by a private developer to DOT road specifications but not dedicated to the county for routine maintenance, resurfacing or replacement purposes. 
Private water/sewer system. Utility service systems owned by private individuals, businesses or corporations which provide water and sewer services to a particular land development. For the purpose of this ordinance, private systems are those which are not owned by a municipal corporation or county government, nor are there any public trust arrangements for their construction and/or maintenance. Lots less than one acre in size must be served by a private or public water or sewer system. 
Protective covenant. A private contract, existing between the land subdivider or developer and subsequent property owners of a particular defined area, limiting design and usage of similarly situated properties. These instruments are generally publicly recorded with a particular land subdivision, and maintenance and enforcement of the contract is between the private parties. 
Public water and sewage systems. A system owned and operated by Ben Hill County. 
Public right-of-way. A portion of land being used as a public street, road, thoroughfare, crosswalk, drainage canal, and/or other similar uses and designated by means of right-of-way deed. 
Street. A public right-of-way which provides vehicular access to abutting property. 
Arterial street. A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is intended to provide swift and safe movement of traffic through the county. 
Collector street. A street which is designated as such on the major thoroughfare plan and which is intended to collect traffic from local streets and direct it safely to arterial streets. 
Dead-end street. A street having only one end open for access to another street, and other end being abruptly terminated with no turnaround. 
Marginal access street. A street generally parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Local street. A street used for local circulation in areas providing access to abutting property. 
Subdivider. Any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership or any agent thereof who undertakes or proposes to undertake the subdivision of land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision. All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, parcels, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale, legacy, or building development, including all division of land involving a new street or a change of width or alignment in existing street(s), and including re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relating to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition (see section 4-3.12): 
a. Where located on an existing public road or street, or an approved private road, the combination or recombination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased, and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the county. 
b. The public acquisition of land.
c. The sale of public land.
d. The subdivision of land into parcels of three acres or more where located on an existing public (county maintained) road. Each three-acre or larger parcel must abut a public road a minimum of 150 feet. 
e. A division or sale of land among heirs by judicial decree, provided that all lots created by the subdivision must front existing state or county roads or an approved private road, and meet current county standards. 
Tax assessor. The Ben Hill County Board of Tax Assessors. 
Tract. A portion of land with definite and ascertainable limits or boundaries. (See definition of Lot.) 
Utility. Any community service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution or collection system such as electricity, telephone, water, gas, cable, and sewage disposal. 
Variance. A variance is relaxation of a dimensional requirement or design standard described within this ordinance as it applies to the development of a particular tract or parcel of land. A variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Platting authority. 
From and after the passage of this ordinance, the planning commission or their designee shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Ben Hill County unless it has the approval of the planning commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the appropriate agencies and/or authorities as required by this ordinance is declared to be a misdemeanor. 
Sec. 3-2. - Use of plat. 
The transfer or sale of land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final review by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Ben Hill County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in such an instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from prescribed penalties. 
Sec. 3-3. - Opening and improving public streets. 
The board of commissioners of Ben Hill County shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street, or lay any utility lines in any street, which has not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this ordinance, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on a reviewed subdivision plat or the major thoroughfare plan. However, the county commission may accept, lay out, open, and improve any street not so platted if it first proposes the action at a public hearing for review and comment and adopts the proposal as an amendment to its major thoroughfare plan. Developers of subdivisions will be solely responsible for acquiring all rights of-ways and dedicating same to Ben Hill County so that in the event Ben Hill County needs to perform maintenance, rights-of-way will be in place. 
Sec. 3-4. - Issuance of building permits. 
Ben Hill County will not issue building permits for any parcel of land, lot, tract, or building site subject to this ordinance that has not been designated and recorded as required by this ordinance. Lots of record are not subject to this requirement. (See [section] 3-7.) 
Sec. 3-5. - Official interpretation. 
The requirement(s) of this ordinance, as they may apply to a proposed land subdivision, shall be officially interpreted by the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator. In cases which the subdivider disagrees with the official interpretation of these regulations, the developer may appeal to the Ben Hill County Commission pursuant to the guidelines established in section 9-5. 
Sec. 3-6. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description (i.e., metes and bounds) has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Ben Hill County which was recorded prior to the adoption of the Ben Hill County Land Subdivision Ordinance, shall be recognized as a non-conforming lot of record. 
Sec. 3-7. - Variances. 
All variances shall be reviewed and acted upon by the planning commission and county commission on a case-by-case basis. Any request for variance shall be based on circumstances unique to the subject property and proposed alternate design or improvements must follow accepted standard engineering practices and principles. (See section 9-4.) All requests for variance shall follow routine county policy which includes a written staff report, planning commission review, and public hearing. 
Sec. 3-8. - Appeal to the board of commissioners. 
Any party aggrieved because of alleged error in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the planning commission, or any other party in enforcement of this ordinance, may appeal in writing to the zoning administrator for an interpretation of the pertinent ordinance provision. In exercising this power of interpretation, the board of commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the, planning commission, or any other party. (See [section] 9-5.) 
Sec. 3-9. - Appeal from the board of commissioners. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Commissioners may seek review of such decision by a Court of Record, as provided by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. [4-0. - ] Pre-application procedure. 
The subdivider may visit with the Ben Hill County staff and discuss the effect of the comprehensive plan, the major thoroughfare plan and other official plans on the proposed subdivision, as well as general design standards, and related matters. 
The subdivider may submit pre-application plans and data for review, advice, and assistance by the county engineer, and the Ben Hill County Health Department. Professional assistance at this early stage may save time and effort during later steps. 
Pre-application plans and data should include: 
a. Location sketch map, showing site in relation to the section of the county in which it is located. 
b. A simple sketch plan on a topographic survey showing general layout of lots, streets, major drainage ways, and other features in relation to existing conditions on the site and the surrounding street system. 
c. General subdivision information including data on proposed or existing covenants, wooded areas, available and proposed community facilities, and utilities, typical lot size, etc., and land characteristics as defined. 
Subdivisions shall be officially reviewed in three stages as follows. 
Sec. 4-1. - Preliminary plat. 
4-1.1 Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary plat is to safeguard the subdivider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat which does not conform with the specifications of the subdivision ordinance. The preliminary plat requires only approximate accuracy of scale and dimension. Public reviewing agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to the Ben Hill County Health Department, [and] County Engineer, if applicable, will review preliminary plats regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process, the subdivider or his agent may be called upon for consultation. 
4-1.2 Subdivisions requiring no new street, water, or sewer facilities. All subdivisions which do not involve the platting, construction, or opening of new streets, water or sewer facilities may be accepted by the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator in the form of a final plat, provided that essential data required by the reviewing agencies to insure compliance with the intent of this ordinance is submitted. This essential data includes a proper soils inventory and a contour map. 
4-1.3 Filing. Any person desiring to subdivide land shall file with the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator five copies of the preliminary plat accompanied by a letter of application. The letter of application shall contain the name and address of the developer(s) and his agent(s), whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases, and plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities. The plat shall be prepared in accordance with this ordinance and with applicable county specifications by a registered land surveyor, who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The preliminary plat shall be deemed filed with the county when it is filed with the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be provided to the subdivider and shall include the time and date of filing. Filing of the preliminary plat shall be accomplished at least 20 working days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. The preliminary plat shall include: 
a. Title block and north arrow. The plat will show the name of the proposed subdivision, its location, by county and city, the name, address and registration number of the surveyor preparing the plat and the date of the plat. A north arrow shall be included with a notation referencing the bearings to magnetic north, astronomical north or grid north. 
b. General layout. The plat shall show information as to the proposed street layout and widths, layout of lots with a notation as to the minimum size and width of lots and any proposed open space. Any lands to be dedicated will be clearly identified. Plat scale, total acreage of the site and total number of lots created shall also be indicated. Lot and block identification and building setback lines shall also be indicated. 
c. Topography. The plat shall show existing contour lines dashed and any proposed contour lines solid, both set of lines to be at two-foot intervals, mean sea level (MSL). Prominent drainage features such as lakes, depressions, streams, etc., which could affect the design of the subdivision shall be shown. Engineering data showing the high water elevation and how it was established shall be submitted with the plat. This may be best accomplished by utilization of the Ben Hill County Flood Hazard Boundary Maps. Any identified flood hazard area shall be clearly indicated on the plat. 
d. Existing features. The plat shall show the locations and names of existing and platted property lines, streets (and its right-of-way), railroads (and its right-of-way), public and private rights-of-way, sanitary sewer (and size), water mains (and size), bridges, culverts, storm drainage (and size), easements, parks and other public open spaces. Land lot and land district lines, city limit lines, and names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions shall also be indicated. Floodplain areas, as identified on officially adopted county maps, and any wetlands areas, as identified on draft U.S. Department of the Interior National Wetlands Inventory Maps, shall be clearly delineated. Groups of trees shall also be indicated. 
e. Location map. The plat shall include a small scale map of sufficient clarity so that the location of the proposed subdivision can be readily determined. 
f. Water and sewer. A statement from the subdivider shall be submitted with the preliminary plat which will describe the method by which sewage disposal and water facilities will be provided. If septic tanks are proposed to serve a subdivision, then a soils inventory prepared by a soil scientist and a contour map shall show location and identification of each soil class. If public water or sewer are proposed, a letter from the providing jurisdiction shall accompany the submittals. 
g. Future tract plan. In cases where a subdivision is to be developed in stages with additional plats being filed with the planning commission at a later date(s), the filing of the initial plat will be accompanied by a future tract plan, a reasonably accurate plat in sketch form of the entire tract which will show the future street system and topography for the entire tract. Once the required tract plan has been given approval by the planning commission, five copies of the approved future tract plan must be provided for distribution to the various reviewing agencies and the inspections office. 
h. Wetlands. Approximate location of wetlands boundaries shall be delineated on the preliminary plat. All preliminary plats delineating wetlands shall have on the face of said preliminary plat the note "No fill or work shall be permitted within jurisdictional wetlands without a prior permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers." All minimum lot area requirements shall be calculated upland of any wetlands boundaries within or contiguous to the project. 
i. [Fill.] If fill or subsurface drainage is used as a modification to make lots acceptable, fill must be in place and a letter from a soil scientist or geotechnical engineer that fill site and fill is acceptable is required before health department will give approval for any lot. All lots not approved must be excluded. 
Also, plans must be submitted to and approved by the health department before modifications can be made to subdivision or individual lot. 
4-1.4 Completeness. If any of the above required information is omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider to be completed or revised. The plat, upon revision, may be resubmitted as a new preliminary plat. 
4-1.5 Approval by individual agencies. No preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning commission unless it is approved by the county engineer, and the board of health. Said agencies shall, with or without modification, approve the preliminary plat to the extent that each has jurisdiction. If the plat is rejected, the respective reviewing agency shall provide the planning commission with a written statement specifying all aspects where the plat fails to comply. 
4-1.6 Coordination. Upon receipt of the filing of the preliminary plat, the zoning administrator shall prepare the submitted materials for review by the appropriate agencies. The various agencies shall complete their reports in a timely fashion, and shall submit their findings to the planning commission for review and approval. it shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to coordinate these reviews and to insure reports are brought together in a timely fashion for proper presentation to the planning commission. 
4-1.7 Approval by planning commission. Approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat shall be accomplished within 45 days after the plat is filed with the planning commission. If after 45 days the planning commission has failed to act, the preliminary plat shall be deemed approved; provided that the subdivider may waive in writing this requirement and consent to an extension of such period. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the motion disapproving the same and the subdivider shall be so informed. 
4-1.8 Preliminary plat approval duration. Approved preliminary plats are valid for one (1) year only from the date of approval. If the final plat or improvement plan have not been submitted within this time period, preliminary plat approval becomes invalid and must be resubmitted. 
Sec. 4-2. - Improvement plans. 
4-2.1 General requirements. Subdivision plans receive their second official consideration as "improvements plans." These improvements plans shall be approved by the county engineer and who shall certify that the improvement plans are in conformance with this ordinance, official county specifications, and with the requirements of the approved preliminary plat. No developer shall proceed with any construction work in the proposed subdivision before obtaining this approval from the county engineer, which must be in writing. 
4-2.2 Professional engineer required. Should certain design calculations be required to resolve flow problems, possible erosion or drainage problems, or other detailed engineering problems which might be encountered in the process of preparing the required improvement plan, the county engineer shall be authorized to require the developer to obtain services of a qualified registered land surveyor or a professional engineer in the improvement plan design process. Should such services be required, such plans shall reflect his registration. All professional surveying or engineering service costs shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
4-2.3 Filing. To secure formal review and approval of his improvement plans, the developer shall file with the zoning administrator three certified (signed and sealed by the developer's registered surveyor or professional engineer) white background prints of the improvement plans, the zoning administrator will then distribute the improvements plan to the county engineer who shall jointly review the proposed improvement plans and shall approve or deny the proposed improvements plans. The zoning administrator shall notify the planning commission of the action in writing. The review of the improvement plan shall include the review of plans for compliance with the Ben Hill County Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, as amended. 
a. Approval means the developer is now authorized to proceed with the physical improvements in the subdivision, after securing any required construction permits, and may proceed with the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
b. Conditional approval means the developer may proceed as outlined in the preceding paragraph, but only after he submits three certified copies of the corrected improvement plans to the county engineer of his review and approval. 
c. Denial means disapproval of the improvement plans. For further consideration, the developer must rework his plans to conform to the requirements of this ordinance, and then submit the reworked plans to the zoning administrator as though they were a completely new set of plans. 
4-2.4 Plans and data required for improvement plan submission. 
The plans for the required minimum improvements shall be prepared and approved by the county engineer and prior to construction and only after approval of the preliminary plan. 
Such improvement plans shall show the proposed locations, sizes, types, grades and general design features of each facility or improvement, and shall be based on reliable field data. Improvement plan approvals are good for one year. If the subdivision is sold prior to completion and final platting, a mandatory review by the county engineer is required. Failure to comply may result in revocation of construction permit after notice and hearing before the planning commission. The developer shall receive a minimum of ten days' written notice of said hearing. 
The improvement construction drawing shall be submitted on white background prints. The sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches unless another size is approved by the county engineer. The drawing shall include the following information: 
a. Construction plans. The developer shall provide the plan and profile of each proposed street (indicating the existing ground surface elevation and proposed street grade surface elevation including extensions for a distance of 100 feet to 300 feet beyond the tract boundary) as required by the county engineer. Design shall be in accordance with good engineering practices. 
b. Street-typical sections. A typical section of each proposed street shall be submitted, showing the width of pavement and the rights-of-way. 
c. Water supply and stormwater drainage. The plan and profile of proposed utility distribution systems, and storm drainage sewers or other drainage ways, with grade and sizes indicated is required. Stormwater drainage shall be consistent with applicable county or city ordinances and other applicable governmental agencies. Water and sewer systems shall be approved by the local jurisdiction providing services and all relevant state agencies. Final approval of the improvement plans shall not be made until the developer submits to the county engineer all final permits required for the construction of all improvements from other state, local jurisdictions providing utility services, or federal agencies. The health department will not approve any plat prior to the proposed public water system having been approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
d. Soil erosion control. A "Soil Erosion Control Plan," prepared in accordance with Ben Hill County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance's latest revisions, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator simultaneous with the improvements plan. 
e. Utility service agreement. A developer's agreement for utilities service shall be required before final improvement plan approval is granted. 
f. Other public improvements. A plan shall be prepared for parks, recreation or other public use areas and improvements if included in the approved preliminary plan. 
g. "As built" plans. The designing surveyor or engineer shall submit to the county engineer three sets of white background prints of certified "as built" plans prior to recording of the final plat. 
4-2.5 Approval of construction drawings/time duration. Upon approval of the preliminary plat and before preparation of the final construction drawings for the minimum improvements required by these regulations, the subdivider shall receive conditional approval of said engineering plans from the county engineer as follows: 
a. The design of all minimum improvements shall be under the direction of a registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor in the State of Georgia with all plans bearing his/her professional seal; 
b. A letter of approval shall accompany all water and sewer plans from the county health department or the appropriate municipal utility official, if applicable; 
c. If construction has not commenced within 24 months of the improvement plan approval, said approval shall become invalid, at which said time a new preliminary plan must be submitted per current regulations at the time of resubmission. 
Sec. 4-3. - Final plat. 
4-3.1 Conformance. The final plat shall conform with the preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, he may submit only that portion of the preliminary plat he proposes to record and develop at that time; provided, that such portion conforms with all requirements of this ordinance. The record plat is to be prepared and sealed by a registered design professional, licensed in the State of Georgia. No plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded unless the plat conforms to Ben Hill County Zoning Ordinance and the acceptance of the required guarantee by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
4-3.2 Filing. Filing the final plat with the zoning administrator shall include the following: 
a. A letter of application shall contain:
1) The name and address of the person(s) developing the subdivision and his agent(s);
2) Zoning of the property to be subdivided;
3) Whether or not the subdivision will be developed in phases;
4) Plans for serving the proposed subdivision with sewer and water facilities.
b. A complete list of deviations, if any, from the approved preliminary plat.
c. A certified copy of all private covenants or deed restrictions, if any, pertaining to land within the subdivision. 
d. A copy of the agreement for providing the necessary water and sewer facilities.
e. A fee to cover the cost of investigation and review of the preliminary plat, improvement plans, the final plat, and final recording costs will be charged at time of application. The fees are as set by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
f. The original reproducible on plastic or linen and five blueline prints of the final plat, which will include the following: 
1) Sheet design. The final plat shall conform to the items listed under the preliminary plat (4-1.3a, 4-1.3b, 4-1.3d, 4-1.3e, 4-1.3g) and the requirements thereof, as set forth in this ordinance and shall be drawn in black India ink on one or more sheets of linen tracing cloth or Mylar film measuring 18 inches by 24 inches. When two or more sheets are used, a key map shall be shown on each sheet. There shall be a two-inch margin on the left end of the plat and a one-half inch margin on the remaining three sides. A revision to a recorded plat shall be drawn in black India ink on the same type cloth or film as mentioned above. The final plat shall be drawn on the scale (stated and graphical) of one inch in 100 feet. 
2) Surveyor certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in Figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
I certify that all measurements are correct and were prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision; the field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule; the plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet; monument and pin locations are correctly shown by the symbols ____________ and the pins are ____________ ____________(type of metallic material and length). 
Signed ____________ (Seal)   (Date) ____________/____________/____________ 
Surveyor, Georgia Registration No.____________ 
a. The surveyor must certify whether or not the property is located in a special flood hazard and indicate the informational source. If the property is located within a flood hazard then the limits of the flood hazard must be shown. 
3) Owner certificate. The following certificate shall be entered on the face of the plat as shown in Figure 1. Placement of this certificate may vary as necessary: 
We, the undersigned owner(s) and/or mortgagee(s) of the ____________________ Subdivision, hereby offer to dedicate and/or reserve for public use the rights-of-way, easements and other ground as shown on this plat. 

 
4) Approvals. The following spaces shall be provided (as shown in Figure 1) in the form listed below for review by all agencies having jurisdiction. Placement on plat may vary: 

 
5) Surveying data. The final plat shall contain the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line and boundary line whether curved or straight. A note will be made on the plat as to whether curved dimensions are arch or chord distances. Easement lines (and width), land lot and land district lines will be shown. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100th of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall be as set forth in the Georgia Platting Act, or as defined by the technical standards required by Georgia Code 84-21 of the Law Governing the Practice of Professional Engineering and Surveying (1980), as amended. The final plat shall have a note listing the following: 
Total Acres ____________ 
Total Lots  ____________ 
NOTE: Distances shown are scaled. 
6) Monuments. The final plat shall show the accurate location, material and description of all monuments. A permanent master bench mark shall be established (subject to the approval of the county engineer) within or adjacent to the site by transfer of levels, not less than third order accuracy, from the nearest approved benchmark of known mean sea level (MSL) elevation showing its location on the final plat and recording its elevation on the final plat to the nearest1/100th of a foot. 
7) Easements. In addition to the requirements for the preliminary plat as set forth in section 4-1.3d of this ordinance, the final plat will show the location and width of all temporary construction easements (as required by standard engineering practice), public utility easements and drainage easements where required. 
8) Improvement plan. At such time as the final plat is filed for review with the zoning administrator, the subdivider shall submit improvements plans to the county engineer for review and approval if not previously approved. Construction drawings shall conform to county specifications. 
4-3.3 Filing certificate. The final plat shall be deemed filed with the planning commission when it is filed with the zoning administrator. At the time of filing, a certificate of filing shall be furnished to the applicant which will include the time and date of filing. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this ordinance and applicable county requirements by a registered land surveyor, who is licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. The zoning administrator and county engineer shall have authority to reject the final plat if they find that it does not conform with the preliminary plat or this ordinance. If the plat is rejected, the zoning administrator shall provide the subdivider with a written statement specifying all the respects in which it does not conform. Filing the final plat shall be accomplished at least 20 working days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. 
4-3.4 Approval by individual agencies. No final plat shall be approved unless the planning commission first obtains concurrence of the Ben Hill County Health Department, and the county engineer, and any affected local jurisdiction providing utility services. Said agencies shall approve, with or without modification, or disapprove the final plat to the extent to which each has jurisdiction. Within ten working days of time of receipt from the zoning administrator, the respective reviewing agency will be notified by the zoning administrator of approval or disapproval. If disapproved, reasons for denial shall be noted. 
4-3.5 Zoning administrator review. The zoning administrator, with assistance from the county's planning advisor, shall review the final plat for technical compliance with Ben Hill County Land Subdivision Ordinance, zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan, and other county ordinances that might impact on the proposed land subdivision. This review shall be submitted to the planning commission along with the review of the respective agencies having jurisdiction. 
4-3.6 Coordination. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to insure that the respective reviews of the county engineer and board of health are brought together in a timely fashion for proper presentation to the planning commission. 
4-3.7 Review by planning commission. Review of the proposed final subdivision plat shall be made by the planning commission at its next regular meeting. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for coordination of information to be brought before the planning commission, which at a minimum, shall include the recommendations of the county engineer, and the health department. The planning commission may grant final approval or may deny the plat if it does not meet standards. The approval of a final plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the county of any street or other ground shown upon the plat. 
4-3.8 Recording a plat. Upon satisfactory compliance with this ordinance, and after review by the planning commission, the final plat will be forwarded to the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator to retain until such time that all required minimum improvements have been completed, inspected and approved and accepted by the county, the required guarantee has been posted and warranty deeds received for all public streets and roads. At such time the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator shall release said final plat for recording. The plat shall be returned to the zoning administrator who shall record the plat in a timely manner. 
4-3.8.1 Performance bonding in lieu of completion of minimum improvements. Upon the county commission's approval, a developer may choose to post a performance bond in the form of a "commercial irrevocable letter of credit" or a "certified check," drawn on a banking institution operating within the State of Georgia, in lieu of completion of minimum improvements. In any such case, the performance bond shall be in the amount of 125 percent of the proposed improvements costs as reviewed by the county engineer and accepted by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. The required guarantee (see section 7-3) must be posted prior to release of the performance bond. 
4-3.9 Revision to a recorded plat. Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which do not affect platted rights-of-way may be submitted for administrative approval in accordance with the provisions of section 4-2.1. In addition, a revision to a recorded plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised, and the exact citation with regard to the county land records and the book and page number wherein said plat is recorded. Revisions to a recorded plat which involve platted rights-of-way or other major changes shall be submitted as a preliminary plat. 
4-3.10 Distribution. The zoning administrator shall make the following distribution of prints and reproducibles: 

 
4-3.11 Administrative review of small subdivisions and resubdivisions. Where a proposed subdivision presents no engineering problems, no required improvements, and few, if any, planning problems, the zoning administrator may waive the requirements of filing a preliminary plat and may recommend review of the final plat to the planning commission. In addition, where located on an existing road or street, the combination or recombination of previously platted lots, where the total number of lots does not increase, and the resultant lots are equal to the current standards of the county shall also be subject to administrative review. Such plats shall conform fully to the requirements of this ordinance. It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to coordinate said administrative review responsibilities. 
4-3.12 Exempt plat process. Any plat submitted for recording that meets conditions for exempt status per the definition of "Subdivision" in section 2-1 are required to be certified by the planning commission or representative. All plats exempt from the standard review process must be assigned a map and parcel number by the Ben Hill County Board of Tax Assessors if a new lot is being created. All exempt plats must be submitted on a Mylar plus five prints. The Mylar will be retained by the zoning administrator. Re-surveys of existing parcels which do not involve a map parcel change must be verified by the tax assessor's office. Any plat submitted through the normal subdivision process shall be assigned a map and a parcel number by the tax assessor's office. 
ARTICLE V. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-1. - Blocks. 
5-1.1 Nonresidential. Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and maneuvering space. 
5-1.2 Residential. The length of residential blocks shall not exceed 1,500 feet nor be less than 400 feet. Blocks of more than 1,500 feet will be permitted if natural or man-made barriers such as streams and railroads require blocks of greater size. The depth of residential blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, unless prohibited by natural or man-made barriers, or unless one tier backs onto a line of another person's property, except as provided for in section 5-3.4. The foregoing shall not prevent the inclusion of blocks of greater width and length when public or joint use areas such as parks and playgrounds are included in the project design. These areas shall be covered by adequate maintenance agreements if not dedicated and accepted for public maintenance. 
5-1.3 Crosswalks. Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided, when in the opinion of the planning commission, crosswalks are necessary for direct pedestrian access to schools, shopping centers, and parks. A crosswalk right-of-way shall not be less than 20 feet wide. 
Sec. 5-2. - Easements. 
5-2.1 Utility. Utility easements for overhead services shall be located within the platted street right-of-way and shall be a minimum width of 20 feet. All proposed lines outside the street rights-of-way shall follow side and rear property lines where possible and at a width determined by the county engineer and necessary for construction and maintenance. Where possible, (as determined by the county engineer), water lines shall be located on the west and south sides of streets and sewer and gas lines shall be on the east and north sides. Wherever utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision tract boundary or phase, they shall be platted within said subdivision or phase thereof. All utilities within said subdivision shall be located within street rights-of-way or properly designed utility easements. Underground utilities at the developer's expense are encouraged in lieu of aerial service. In all instances where a water line is proposed to cross under a paved surface, said line shall be cased and said easement shall extend three feet beyond pavement edge. 
5-2.2 Drainage. No subdivision plat shall be accepted or approved unless it includes a hydrology plan, sedimentation and soil erosion control plan certified by a professional engineer or registered land surveyor. The plan shall provide a means of detaining storm and surface water runoff on site, up to and including a 25-year flood event, with such runoff to be released from the property at the same rate of flow that existed prior to the development of property. The engineer or surveyor shall certify that the designed stormwater detention system for the development will fully satisfy these provisions. The county engineer will verify the accuracy of the drainage plans and may call upon the services of other design professionals for review at the expense of the developer should on-site conditions warrant more detailed review. The developer is solely responsible for the accuracy of all the submitted plans. 
Sec. 5-3. - Lots. 
5-3.1 Minimum lot elevation. The lot area contained within and contiguous to the building walls and for a minimum distance of ten feet measured from all sides of said building shall have a minimum elevation of two feet above the 100-year flood stage of streams or canals in the particular area being developed based on acceptable engineering procedure and reviewed by the county engineer. Said minimum elevation shall be subject to approval by the board of health. No change of elevation necessary to meet this requirement will be permitted if the change constitutes filling within a designated flood hazard. 
(a) Floodprone areas. All preliminary and final plats shall clearly delineate identified floodplain areas in conformance with the Ben Hill County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
(b) Wetlands. Delineated wetlands shall be indicated on the plat. Health department standards require all septic systems to be located at least 50 feet from any identified wetlands. 
5-3.2 Lot width and lot area requirements. Lots hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the lot area and lot width requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance for Ben Hill County or in other sections of this ordinance. The health department requires a 120-foot lot width for lots with individual water and sewer at the location of the drain field and reserve field area, and a 100-foot width for lots served with public water. 
5-3.3 Corner lots. Corner lots shall be of such size and dimensions that will permit the location of buildings so as to conform with the building setback lines as prescribed in the zoning ordinance. Corner property lines at street intersections shall have a minimum of 20-foot radius. 
5-3.4 Double and reverse frontage. Lots having street frontage both to the front and rear shall be prohibited (unless allowed by variance) except to provide for separation of residential development from railroad right-of-way or arterial street rights-of-way. Where the aforementioned abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide for lots backing on said railroad or right-of-way, or arterial street right-of-way. All lots shall have a minimum depth adequate to provide for the rear yard setback, plus an additional 30 feet, ten feet of which shall be a planted, non-encroachable buffer strip separating the lots from the right-of-way. The buffer shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees to provide a visual screen and shall be planted at the time of development. Said planted, non-encroachable buffer strip shall be clearly indicated on the final plat and its ingress/egress control shall be dedicated to Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 5-4. - Commercial and industrial use buffer. 
When a portion of the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial and/or industrial purposes and when the commercial and/or industrial area adjoins residential lots, or when a portion of a proposed subdivision adjoins an area [designated] for commercial or industrial use, a buffer not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided. Said buffer strip shall be landscaped with hedges or closely planted small trees so as to provide visual screening. No building, lighting, parking or signage, or portion thereof may be constructed in said buffer, and its control shall be dedicated to Ben Hill County. Said non-encroachable buffer shall be labeled as such on the subdivision plat and shall be planted at the time of installation of the required minimum improvements. 
Sec. 5-5. - Streets. 
The street and road system of any subdivision shall give due consideration to the major thoroughfare plan. A right-of-way that is determined to be limiting the growth or traffic flow of an area will not be accepted. 
Sec. 5-6. - Access. 
Every lot of every subdivision shall abut a public or an approved private street a minimum of sixty feet. Neither easements nor substandard width shall constitute adequate access. Where the subdivision does not immediately adjoin a public street, the subdivider shall provide access by either a public street or an approved private road from the subdivision to said road. 
5-6.1 Alignment and continuation. Streets within the subdivision shall be so arranged as to provide for the alignment and continuation of or projection of existing public streets. 
5-6.2 Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a right-of-way of not less than 100 feet in diameter. Paving within the turnaround shall have an outside diameter of not less than 70 feet. Temporary culs-de-sac, approved by the planning commission or their designee, may be surfaced with gravel. 
5-6.3 Dead-end streets. Permanent dead-end streets and dead-end alleys shall be prohibited unless terminated with a cul-de-sac. 
5-6.4 Half streets. Permanent half streets and half alleys shall be prohibited. Half streets and half alleys are streets and alleys with substandard rights-of-way. 
5-6.5 Intersections. The center line of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. No street shall intersect another street at less than 80 degrees and shall as nearly as possible intersect at 90 degrees. 
5-6.6 Right-of-way radius. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be no less than 20 feet except where Georgia Department of Transportation standards shall prevail. 
5-6.7 Curved streets. The centerline radius shall not be less than 350 feet for arterial streets, and 120 feet for collector and local streets. Centerline tangents between reverse curves shall be not less than 200 feet for arterial streets and 100 feet for collector streets and local streets. 
5-6.8 Right-of-way extension. Where the proposed subdivision abuts undeveloped properties, it is essential that appropriate extensions of streets be provided to facilitate future growth and development. Such street rights-of-way to facilitate future development shall be extended by dedication and improved to the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
5-6.9 Street jogs. Street jogs at intersections shall be not less than 150 feet between centerline offsets. This provision shall not negate the design intent of section 5-6.2. 
5-6.10 Street names. The subdivider shall indicate on the subdivision plat the proposed name or number of all streets within the subdivision. Streets and roads that are obviously in alignment with and are extensions of existing previously named or numbered streets shall bear that name. The names of all new streets within the subdivision shall be subject to the review and approval of the planning commission, with review and assistance from the 911 coordinator. 
5-6.11. Street right-of-way and pavement width. 
Street rights-of-way shall be measured between lot lines. The pavement width shall be reviewed by the county engineer for adequate width. Subdivision streets shall have a pavement width with properly designed swale ditch which shall be developed within the right-of-way. On non-curb and gutter, ditch side slopes shall be no greater than 3:1. 
Subdivisions planned for annexation shall be developed to current appropriate city standards and shall be subject to review of the respective county engineer. 
5-6.12. Additional rights-of-way. If the subdivision boundary line lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing street of less than minimum right-of-way width, the required extra right-of-way to bring the street to current standards shall be dedicated. 
5-6.13. Provisions for public use. In subdividing land, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use. Such land should be located in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The acquisition of such land shall rest with the appropriate public authority. 
Sec. 5-7. - Increase in flood potential prohibited. 
No development shall be undertaken that can be expected to appreciably increase the flood potential within the development or on adjacent or surrounding lands. 
Sec. 5-8. - Conformance to site characteristics. 
Block size and shape shall reflect the physical characteristics of the site regarding topography and natural conditions, and shall permit access, circulation, control and efficient movement of traffic. 
Sec. 5-9. - Access restriction to major thoroughfares. 
No streets or driveways shall enter a major thoroughfare as designated on the official road classification map at point nearer than 500 feet from another street or thoroughfare. When a proposed development abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare the street plan shall provide vehicular access to each lot abutting said thoroughfare by means of: 
a. A parallel minor street, supplying frontage for said lots backing onto, but separated from said thoroughfare by a non-access easement of at least 20 feet in depth; or another such plan as may be approved by the county engineer. 
b. No access to a state or federal route shall be permitted without the prior approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-6-152. 
Sec. 5-10. - Restriction of access to collector and local streets and minor roads. 
The following provisions shall govern access to all streets and thoroughfares not designated as major thoroughfares on the official road classification map: 
a. No driveway shall be located nearer than 50 feet from any street intersection or from a driveway serving the same lot or parcel. 
b. No streets or thoroughfare shall intersect nearer than 200 feet of an existing street or thoroughfare intersection. 
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 6-1. - General. 
The subdivider shall provide all public improvements as required by this ordinance and by applicable county specifications and requirements. 
6-1.1 The design of all minimum improvements shall be under the direction of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia and all plans shall bear his seal. (See section 4-2.2.) 
6-1.2 A certificate of approval from the Ben Hill County Health Department shall accompany all water and sewer plans, and a certificate or letter from any local jurisdiction providing utility services. 
Sec. 6-2. - Curb and gutter. 
The subdivider is not required to install any curbs and/or gutters in the proposed project. However, nothing in these regulations precludes the installation of said improvements if desired as long as said improvements do not adversely impact any street paving or drainage apparatuses functions or improvements. 
Sec. 6-3. - Monuments; pins. 
The subdivider shall provide, through the licensed surveyor, the setting of all reinforced concrete monuments and pins. The reinforced concrete monuments shall be four inches in diameter or square, 30 inches long with a flat top. The top of each monument shall be set flush with the ground. Said monuments shall be set within each block of the subdivision and shall be located along the longest interior straight away; a minimum of four per block shall be installed as shown on the plat. Pins, a minimum of 15 inches long and one-half inch in diameter (metallic material type to be listed on plat) shall be placed along the exterior boundary and interior lot intersection except where concrete monuments are to be located, on each street corner, points of curvature in each street at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and where such corners lie within a stream meander (in which case reference pins shall be placed on the bank of the stream). The pin shall be set a minimum of two inches under the ground. The top of the concrete monument shall contain a metal plate or metal rod which shall be scored in such a manner that will properly and accurately identify the location. 
Sec. 6-4. - Water supply and sanitary sewerage. 
6-4.1 It is the intent of these regulations that the general public health of the county be safeguarded from the proliferation of septic tank systems and individual wells in higher density developments. 
6-4.2 Where public sanitary sewerage and/or public water is available within 1,000 feet of any portion of the subdivider's property, the subdivider shall provide every lot of the subdivision with public sewer and public water in accordance with applicable governmental (either city or county) specifications. Said facilities are to be dedicated to the applicable city for public maintenance and operation prior to recording of the plat. 
6-4.3 Where a public water supply and/or public sewage system is not accessible, and where topography, soil characteristics, drainage, groundwater or other physical conditions preclude safe on-site water supplies and/or sewage disposal systems, the developer shall furnish to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, plans and specifications for a public water supply and/or public sewage disposal system for the subdivision. For the purposes of this ordinance, any water system supplying more than two single-family residences and/or businesses shall meet the standards of a public water system and shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources for such a system. Unless the water system is public and permitted by DNR, all minimum lot sizes must be at least one acre. 
6-4.4 For lots served by either an individual water supply or an individual sewerage disposal system, the minimum lot size shall be 22,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
6-4.5 For lots served by both an individual water supply and an individual sewerage disposal system, the minimum lot size shall be one acre with a minimum lot width of 120 feet. 
Sec. 6-5. - Street signs. 
The developer shall pay for all street signs required for his subdivision at a cost of (to be determined) per sign. These fees shall be paid to the county prior to release of the plat for recording. The county shall install all street signs for any subdivision in accordance with the county's sign specifications and at no cost to the county. 
Sec. 6-6. - Paving and drainage. 
Within the unincorporated area of Ben Hill County, the subdivider shall install paving and proper drainage, which may include ditch slopes and grassing requirements. Proper drainage control structures which may include paved ditches and canals, and which will require established grass on road shoulders, front and back slopes of ditches and erosion control devices at outfall locations. 
All streets, roads and/or alleys that are to be used by the general public and are to be dedicated to the county shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set by Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. 
The county engineer will determine the type of base material to be used on each and all subdivisions based on conditions and sound engineering judgment prior to beginning any grading work. An alternative paving method (such as service treatment) may be used if determined acceptable by the county engineer. These materials shall be applied according to established construction methods and shall be subject to inspection by and final approval by the county engineer prior to acceptance for public maintenance. 
Sec. 6-7. - Utilities. 
The installation of utilities shall be as follows: 
6-7.1 Communication distribution systems. All communication distribution systems installed solely for the purpose of extending communications service within a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed as directed by the county engineer. 
6-7.2 Electric power distribution systems. All electric distribution systems installed solely for the purpose of extending electric service to a development and within the property limits of such development shall be placed as directed by the appropriate utility company, or any local jurisdiction providing services. 
6-7.3 Easements. Developers shall allocate necessary easements with future maintenance access. 
6-7.4 Location of underground installations. The plans submitted to Ben Hill County will set forth the anticipated location of all underground installations. Location approval or acknowledgment by the owners of the underground installations shall be submitted. 
Sec. 6-8. - Buffer strips. 
The subdivider shall provide adequate buffer strips which consist of plantings and/or visual blinds as detailed in this ordinance. 
Sec. 6-9. - Installation of improvements. 
No grading, paving, or construction of any required improvements shall be permitted until the final plat and improvements plan of the subdivision has been reviewed and received the approval of the planning commission and the acceptance of the guarantee/maintenance bond by the board of county commissioners. The improvement plan must include a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and corresponding land disturbance permit. 
Sec. 6-10. - Completion of minimum improvements. 
In such cases where a developer might choose to post a performance bond in lieu of completion of minimum improvements, within one year from recording of a phase or final plat, all minimum improvements required by these regulations shall be completed, constructed and installed in the proposed development area. Should this not be accomplished within the prescribed time, the county commission shall declare the bond forfeited and hire appropriate contractors to complete the required minimum improvements. Any county costs incurred in completing the project shall be charged against the performance bond. 
Sec. 6-11. - Building permit. 
No permit for construction of any building or any lot of a proposed subdivision shall be issued unless the plat of the proposed subdivision has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of Ben Hill County, Georgia, and unless the minimum site improvements as prescribed in this ordinance have been made and such improvements have been inspected and approved by the county engineer, and accepted by the county board of commissioners. 
6-11.1 Building permits may be issued for a portion of a subdivision prior to the completion of the improvements in the entire subdivision only if a performance bond in the amount of 125 percent of the improvements as prescribed in paragraph 4-3.8.1 of this ordinance is posted and accepted by the board of county commissioners. This standard shall apply to county-mandated minimum improvements. All health department related improvements must be made prior to release of any plat for recording. 
A building permit shall be issued and a building shall be erected on any lot in the unincorporated portions of the county only after the lot has been subdivided according to this chapter, all other county requirements relating to the use of land have been met, and the street giving access thereto is: 
(i) Included on an approved, recorded, final plat and has been accepted through resolution by the board of commissioners; or 
(ii) Has attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of that resolution.
ARTICLE VII. - ACCEPTANCE AND GUARANTEE OF COMPLETED MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 7-1. - Completion of improvements. 
Before the plat is released for recording by the Ben Hill Zoning Administrator, all developers shall be required to complete, in accordance with this ordinance and to the satisfaction of the county engineer, all minimum improvements as required by Section [Article] VI of this ordinance, specified on the final plat, and as reviewed and has received the concurrence of the planning commission, and to dedicate same to Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 7-2. - Acceptance. 
Upon written notification of completion of minimum improvements, the zoning administrator shall within 30 days after such notice accept or reject, in writing, the completed improvements stating the deficiencies, if any. 
The required minimum improvements shall not be accepted unless they conform to this ordinance and officially adopted county specifications. 
Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets and rights-of-way, public areas or easements shall be by resolution of the board of commissioners. Approval of a final plat in accordance with this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute, imply or effect acceptance by the county of any street, right-of-way, public area or easement shown on a final plat. 
Sec. 7-3. - Guarantee. 
The subdivider shall guarantee to the county, for a period of one year, after completion and acceptance of the improvement, all material and workmanship going into such improvement. The subdivider shall post a bond with the county, conditioned upon the faithful performance of such guaranty. In lieu of furnishing the subdivider's bond, the subdivider may assign to the county an approved contractor's guaranty and bond. Such guaranty and bond shall be posted prior to approval by the county of the subdivision plat. Cash shall be accepted in lieu of bond. This guaranty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the total improvements cost. 
Sec. 7-4. - Recording of plat. 
Upon acceptance of all improvements installed by the developer and posting of the required guarantee, the office of the zoning administrator shall release the final plat for recording. Said plat shall be returned to the zoning administrator, who shall record said plat in a timely manner and distribute appropriate copies thereof in accordance with the directives of section 4-3.8. When a subdivision is developed in phases, each phase shall be considered a separate final plat. 
Sec. 7-5. - Release of guarantee. 
Release of guarantee shall be made by board of county commissioners one year after the completion of all required improvements. At the end of the one year, the zoning administrator shall arrange for a maintenance/warranty inspection by the county engineer with said inspection expenses be solely the responsibility of the subdivider. Any bonded maintenance of the minimum improvements shall be determined by the county engineer, and said work shall be required of the developer or his contractor prior to release of any guaranteed funds by the board of county commissioners. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-1. - Violations. 
8-1.1 It shall be unlawful to convey or improve property by the construction of buildings on lots of any land subdivision which has not been reviewed and recorded as provided in this ordinance, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
8-1.2 It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat or once recorded, to make any changes thereon whatsoever which have not been reviewed by the planning commission, county engineer and the Ben Hill County Health Department in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
8-1.3 Each day's violation a separate offense. After due notice has been given each and every day's violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 8-2. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction in magistrate's court, be penalized by the imposition of a fine not exceeding $500.00 per day and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not greater than 60 days as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 
ARTICLE IX. - LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 9-1. - Effect of invalidity of part of ordinance. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any other part thereof. 
Sec. 9-2. - Conflict with other laws. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 9-3. - Amendment. 
This ordinance may be amended from time to time by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners, but no amendment shall become effective unless it has been proposed or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for its review and recommendation. 
Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the county shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 but not more than 45 days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in the official legal organ of Ben Hill County. 
Sec. 9-4. - Variances. 
In cases of undue hardship under this ordinance, any property owner may petition the county commission for a variance. All variance requests will require a public hearing in the same manner as an amendment. No application for a variance affecting the same land subdivision and the issue applied for variance shall be accepted for reconsideration less than twelve months after the issue has been considered and denied. None of the items listed in Article VI, Minimum Improvements, of these regulations shall be subject to variance. 
Sec. 9-5. - Official interpretation. 
Any party aggrieved because of alleged error in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or any other party in enforcement of this ordinance, may appeal in writing to the zoning administrator for an interpretation of the pertinent ordinance provision. In exercising this power of interpretation, the board of commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or any other party. (See [section] 3-5.) All official interpretation requests will require a public hearing in the same manner as a variance or an ordinance amendment. 
Sec. 9-6. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the date of adoption. 
ARTICLE X. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Sec. 10-1. - Plat review fee schedule. 
All plats to be reviewed, including phases, shall adhere to a fee schedule as set from time to time by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
Sec. 10-2. - Variance requests, administrative appeals and amendments. 
All variance requests, administrative appeals and amendments, shall be accompanied by an application fee and costs to cover all publication of required public notices and staff review costs as set from time to time by the Ben Hill County Board of Commissioners. 
Appendix B - ZONING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the county's zoning ordinance, as adopted by the board of commissioners on December 15, 1989. Maps entitled Ben Hill County, Georgia, Zoning District Map, and Major Thoroughfare Plan, Street and Road Classifications, Ben Hill County, Georgia, are on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. (Back)
SECTION 1. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

Sec. 1-1. - Enactment clause. 
The board of commissioners of Ben Hill County, under the authority of Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶¶ I and IV, and the amendments thereto, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following sections. 
Sec. 1-2. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for Ben Hill County, Georgia." 
Sec. 1-3. - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall govern the use of all land and the developments thereof within the unincorporated areas of Ben Hill County, Georgia. 