CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF WOODBURY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted January 15, 2001  Effective January 15, 2001 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 

 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WOODBURY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ronnie Garrett 
Mayor 
____________ 
Chuck Bell 
Alton Haliday 
George Prather 
Allen Stephens 
City Council 
____________ 
Angel Fowler 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Jeffrey Todd 
City Attorney 
____________ 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Index 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ron MacLaughlin, Code Attorney, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Angel Fowler, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbury, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF 1-15-01 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Woodbury, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and City Council: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Woodbury, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 21, 1999, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment not exceeding 180 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 21, 1999, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 15, 2001. 
Passed and Adopted by the city council this 15th day of January, 2001. 
By:;sigr; Ronnie Garrett\Mayor 
ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of Woodbury, held on the 15th day of January, 2001. 


PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - CHARTER OF 1913[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1913 Georgia Laws, page 1264, as adopted by the Georgia General Assembly. Amendments to this act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Woodbury, town of, name changed, city of, charter powers. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the name of the municipal corporation heretofore existing in the County of Meriwether said state, under the name of the Town of Woodbury, be and the same is, hereby changed to the City of Woodbury; and said municipal corporation is hereby reincorporated and made and continued as a body corporate and politic under said name of the City of Woodbury without any break in the continuity of its existence, it being the same corporation under a new name; and under said name said city shall have perpetual succession, and the right to contract and be contracted with, to sue and be sued, to plead and be impleaded, and to have and use a common seal, to do such things as may be needful for the government, good order and welfare of said city and its inhabitants, to exercise such rights, powers, functions, privileges and immunities as belong to municipal corporations generally under the law, as well as those hereinafter specially enumerated, and to do all other acts and things relating to its corporate capacity; and also under said name to purchase, hold, lease, receive, enjoy, possess and retain for the use and benefit of said city, any property, real or personal, of whatever kind or nature whatsoever within the limits or without the limits of said city, for corporate purposes, and to hold all property and effects now belonging to said municipal corporation for the purposes and intents for which the same were granted or dedicated; and to use, manage, improve, sell, convey, rent or lease, or otherwise deal with any and all property at present owned or which may be hereinafter acquired by said city. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of said city shall extend three-quarters of a mile in every direction from the middle of Greenville Street where Depot Street intersects said Greenville Street. 
Sec. 3. - Corporate rights of Town of Woodbury preserved. 
All corporate rights, powers and privileges now possessed by and all duties imposed by law upon said municipal corporation of the Town of Woodbury are hereby preserved unto said city under its new name of the City of Woodbury. All acts and parts of acts of the general assembly of the state relating to said town and all resolutions, regulations and ordinances heretofore adopted by the authorities of said town and in force therein at the time of the approval of this act, and all parts of same, shall remain in force save such of each as are in conflict with the provisions of this act. Such ordinances, regulations and resolutions may be hereafter amended or repealed by the mayor and aldermen of said city. All property and property rights now held, owned or possessed by said city, and all obligations of every kind and character due to or by said municipal corporation shall remain unchanged and of full force. All pending suits or claims by or against said city are preserved intact and unaltered. The present mayor and aldermen and the present officers and employees of the Town of Woodbury shall continue to discharge the duties of their respective offices and positions until their successors are elected and qualified, or appointed, as the case may be, or until they are removed in accordance with the provisions of this charter or the ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 4. - Elections. 
On the first Wednesday in December, 1966 and annually thereafter, an election shall be conducted in the council chamber of the City of Woodbury for the purpose of electing candidates whose terms shall expire on the first Wednesday in January of the following year. In order to be elected, a candidate shall receive a majority of the votes cast for the office for which he offers as a candidate. For the purpose of electing councilmen, positions on the council shall be numbered council posts 1 through 4, respectively. In all future elections, candidates for councilman shall designate by number the position on the council for which he offers as a candidate. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, there shall be a runoff election between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office. The runoff election shall be held fourteen days after the regular municipal election under the same laws, rules and regulations governing regular city elections. The mayor and two councilmen elected to council posts 1 and 2 in December, 1966, shall serve for terms of office of two years each and until their successors are elected and qualified. The two councilmen elected to council posts 3 and 4 in December, 1966, shall serve for terms of office of one year each and until their successors are elected and qualified. Thereafter, the mayor and councilmen shall be elected for terms of office of two years each and until their successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to vote or serve as mayor or councilman who is not qualified to vote for members of the general assembly of this state. Elections shall be held and conducted in the same manner as elections for officers in this state and a certificate of the managers shall be sufficient authority for the persons elected to enter into the discharge of the duties of the office to which they had been elected. In the event that the office of the mayor or any councilman shall become vacant by death, resignation, or removal or other cause, the mayor, or in case his seat is vacant, the majority of the councilmen shall order a new election, notice of which shall be given at least twenty days before said election is held, the same to be conducted as provided in this act. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, p. 3318, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Oath of mayor and councilmen. 
Before entering on the discharge of their duties the mayor and the councilmen shall subscribe to an oath to faithfully discharge such duties as shall devolve upon them as officials of the City of Woodbury. The following oath shall be administered to and taken by the mayor and councilmen, before some officer authorized by the laws of Georgia to administer oaths, to-wit: "I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself as mayor (or councilman, as the case may be) of the City of Woodbury for the ensuing term, and that I will faithfully enforce the Charter and ordinances of said city to the best of my ability without fear or favor, so help me God." Should the mayor or any councilman be absent when the officers qualify, he or they shall take the oath of office as soon as possible thereafter. 
Sec. 6. - Mayor pro tem. 
There shall be a mayor pro tem of said City of Woodbury who shall be elected by the council of the said City of Woodbury, who shall preside and act as mayor of said city during the absence or disqualification of the mayor of said city. 
Sec. 7. - Quorum; mayor votes, when. 
The mayor or mayor pro tem and a majority of said council shall, for all purposes under this Charter, constitute a quorum for the transaction of any and all business, whether legislative or judicial, and it shall require at least three affirmative votes to pass any resolution or ordinance; and the mayor shall only be allowed to vote on any question or ordinance that may arise before the mayor and council only when there is a tie. 
Sec. 8. - Salaries. 
The salary of the mayor shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00) per annum and the salary of each councilman shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, p. 3318, § 2) 
Sec. 9. - Powers of mayor and council. 
Said mayor and council shall have power to pass all such ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations as may in their discretion be necessary to enforce all of the laws of the State of Georgia applicable to municipal corporations, and which laws in so far as they are not in conflict with this act are made a part thereof, and to provide penalties for their violation. They shall have power and authority to lay off, open, close, alter, vacate, curb, pave and keep in good order, repave all streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains and gutters for the use of the public or any of the citizens thereof and to improve and light the same and have them kept free from obstructions on or over them; and to regulate the width of sidewalks on the streets, and to order the sidewalks, footways, crosswalks, drains and gutters to be curbed and paved and kept in good order, free and clean, by the owners and occupants thereof, or the owners or occupants of the real property next adjacent thereto; to establish and regulate the markets; to prescribe the time of holding same; to prevent injury or annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome; to prevent hogs, cattle and other animals or fowls of all kinds from going at large in said town; to protect places of divine worship in and about the premises; to abate or cause to be abated anything which in the opinion of the mayor and council shall be a nuisance; to regulate the keeping of dynamite and other combustibles; to abate or cause to be abated, nuisances in the form of lewd or bawdy houses or houses suspected of being such, and places keeping or suspected of keeping for unlawful sale any liquors, wines, beers or other intoxicating alcoholic drinks by whatever name or names the same may be called; to provide in or near said city places for the burial of the dead, and to regulate interments therein; to provide for the regular building of houses or other structures and for the making of division fences by the owner of adjacent premises, and a dr ainage of lots by proper drains and ditches, to make regulations against danger by fire and to provide limits in which no wooden buildings shall be erected; to protect the property and person of the citizens of said town; to preserve peace and order therein, and for this purpose the said mayor or mayor pro tem shall appoint, when necessary, a police force to assist the marshal or chief of police in the discharge of such duties; to provide the powers and define the duties of all officers appointed or elected by the mayor and council and to fix their terms of office and compensation, require and take from them bonds, when necessary, payable to the City of Woodbury in its incorporate name, with such security and with such penalty as the mayor and council may see fit, conditioned for the faithful discharge of their duty; to erect or authorize or prohibit the erection of waterworks, gas works, or electric lights in said town; to prevent injury to or pollution of same or to the same, or to the water or healthfulness of said city; to make such rules and regulations as they may deem proper regulating the running of locomotives or cars, whether run by steam, electricity or other power; to enact ordinances preventing the delivery within the incorporate limits of said city of wine, beer, whiskey or other intoxicating liquors, by any corporation, company, partnership or by any other person or persons directly or indirectly, and to enact ordinances providing for penalty for so doing. Said city is further authorized and empowered to enact ordinances to provide for the seizure and forfeiture to city of such intoxicants within the corporate limits of said city, and for the disposition of same by sale or otherwise in the hands of any corporation, company or person whatsoever. Said city is further authorized and empowered in the exercise of its police powers to provide for and enact any other ordinance looking to the regulation, restriction, suppression or prohibition of liquor traffic, legal or otherwise, within the corporate limits of said city; provided, however, that the provisions of this act shall be held and construed to apply to domestic commerce and intrastate shipments as distinguished from shipments from beyond state and interstate commerce; to regulate and provide for the weighing of hay, coal and other articles sold, or for sale, in said city, and to provide a revenue for said city, and to appropriate same for expenses of said city; to pass all laws, ordinances and regulations for the protection of inhabitants of said city against smallpox and other contagious or infectious diseases, or for the care of those who may have such diseases or [are] suspected of having them. 
Sec. 10. - Ad valorem tax. 
For the purpose of raising revenues to defray the ordinary expenses incident to the proper support and maintenance of city government said mayor and council of City of Woodbury shall, commencing with the calendar year 1964, have full power and authority to levy and collect an ad valorem tax upon all property, both real and personal, in the corporate limits of said city, not to exceed twelve mills upon each dollar of valuation. In addition thereto the said mayor and council shall have the authority to levy and collect an ad valorem tax not to exceed four mills for macadamizing, capital improvements and bond payments. 
(1964 Ga. Laws, p. 2412, § 1) 
Sec. 11. - Commutation tax; defaulters. 
Every male person between the ages of twenty-one and fifty years, who has resided in said city thirty days, shall be liable and subject to work on the streets of said city, not to exceed fifteen days in each year, at such time or times as the mayor and council may require, or to pay a commutation tax in lieu thereof, not to exceed five dollars in any one year, as said mayor and council may determine. Should any person unable to work the streets under this section fail or refuse to do so, or to pay said tax assessed in lieu thereof, having received due notice to do so, as said mayor and council may require, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section, and on conviction in the police court of said city shall be fined in a sum not exceeding five dollars nor less than the amount of street tax so assessed, or by imprisonment in the guard house, or by labor in a chaingang of said city, not exceeding thirty days. Said mayor and council may pass such ordinance as they may deem proper for the enforcing of this section. 
Sec. 12. - Guard house and work gang. 
The mayor and council of the City of Woodbury shall have power to establish a guard house and work gang in said city and to confine at labor therein any persons who have been sentenced by the court of said city, to work upon the streets, sidewalks or other public works of said city, and shall have power to make all rules and regulations that may seem necessary for the control or government of such work gang and enforce the same through its proper authorities. 
Sec. 13. - Licenses, regulations. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have full power and authority to license, regulate and control by ordinance all taverns, hotels, boardinghouses, cafes, saloons for the sale of ice cream and other ices, etc., livery stables and lots, hacks, drays and other vehicles, auctioneers, vendue masters, itinerant traders, theatres and theatrical performances, dummy or street railroads, oil mills, ice works, laundries, waterworks, shows, circuses, exhibitions of all kinds; itinerant lightning-rod dealers, emigrant dealers, peddlers of clocks, stoves, machines or any other article of merchandise whatsoever; itinerant vendors of any and all kinds of goods, wares, merchandise or other things; pool and bagatelle tables kept for public playing, every table, device or stand or place for the performance of any game or play, whether played with sticks, balls, rings; upon flying horses or contrivances; bicycles, vehicles or skating rinks; insurance agents, life, fire, accident or other insurance companies; loan agents for any and all kinds of business; real estate agents, banks and bankers, brokers and commission merchants of all kinds; keepers of slaughterhouses, beef markets, green grocers; dealers in fresh oysters, or fish, vegetables, fruits, breads and other articles of food; contractors and builders and all machinists or artisans; barbershops, junk shops, pawnbrokers and upon all and every other establishment, business, calling, trade or avocation not heretofore mentioned, and which, under the constitution and laws of Georgia, in the amount fixed by ordinance, as a condition precedent to beginning or continuing in any business, trade, profession or calling in said city, for which a license is required. Should any person engage or continue in any business, trade, profession or calling for which any specific tax or license is required by said city, by ordinance, and shall fail or refuse to pay the same on demand of the proper authority of said city, he shall be liable to prosecution in a police court of said city, and may be fined or imprisoned in the discretion of the court. The provisions of this section shall apply to all persons, natural or artificial. 
Sec. 14. - Fiscal year from which licenses shall date. 
The mayor and council of said city shall have power and authority to make and establish, by ordinance, a fiscal year from which and to which all license shall date. Should any person apply for license in said city for any business for which license is required, at any time after the fiscal year has begun, the mayor and council shall have authority to require of such person the same amount as required for license for the whole year; provided, that no change in the fiscal year shall operate to the injury of any person who has once paid the amount of license required of him. 
Sec. 15. - Executions and sales. 
The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to enforce by execution the collection of any debt or claim due said city for taxes, licenses, rents, impounding fees, forfeitures for laying sewers or drains, for cleaning or repairing privies, for abating nuisances and for any and all levies, assessments, debts and demands due said city. Said executions to be issued by the clerk of said city and to bear test in the name of the mayor against the property, person, corporation or firm against which or from whom any such debt or demand is owing, such execution to be directed to all and singular, the marshal, deputy marshal, and policeman of the City of Woodbury, who are authorized to levy the same upon the property against whom it is issued, or on the property of the person against whom such execution shall have been issued, and the same shall be sold in the following manner, to wit: The property levied upon shall be sold by the marshal or his deputy at public outcry, under the laws for sheriffs' sales, to the highest bidder, before the council chamber or at such other place as the mayor may determine, notice of which place shall be stated in the advertisement of the sale of such property. 
If said property so levied on shall be personal, it shall be advertised by posting notices at two or more public and conspicuous places in said city for ten days before the day of sale, and if the property levied upon shall be real estate, he shall advertise the same once a week for four weeks in public gazette wherein the sheriffs' sales are advertised for the County of Meriwether or in some newspaper published in the City of Woodbury, before selling the same. All sales as above provided shall be sold at public outcry, to the highest bidder, for cash. Said marshal or deputy marshal making such sale shall execute title to the purchaser and shall have the same power to place the purchaser in possession as sheriffs of state have. 
Sec. 16. - Tax assessors, election of; vacancies, how filled; oath. 
The mayor and council of the City of Woodbury shall elect, at their first or second meeting in each calendar year, three upright, discreet and intelligent persons, who shall be freeholders and residents of said city, as tax assessors, who shall hold their office one year, or until their successors are elected and qualified. Said tax assessors may be elected from among the members of the city council, or from among other persons, and should any vacancy occur in said board or [of] assessors by death, resignation, removal or refusal to serve, such vacancy shall be immediately filled by said mayor and council. Said mayor and council shall be exclusive judges of the necessity of declaring a vacancy in said board of assessors. Before entering upon the duties of the office of assessors, each assessor shall take and subscribe the following: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully perform the duties of tax assessor of the City of Woodbury and make a true and just valuation of all property therein subject to taxation according to fair market value, so help me God." Said assessors shall receive such pay for their services as the mayor and council may fix. 
Sec. 17. - Appeal from assessments. 
The tax assessors may hear during the progress of their investigation such evidence as to value of property in said city as they may deem advisable. If any person is dissatisfied with the valuation of his or her property, as fixed by the assessors, he shall have a right to appeal to a full board of assessors and then to the mayor and council. Said appeal shall be entered within four days from the date upon which the written or printed notice hereafter provided for has been mailed by the clerk of said city. Said appeal shall be substantially as follows, to wit: "The undersigned being dissatisfied with the action of the city tax assessors with reference to the valuation of his or her property subject to taxation in said city, comes within ten days from date on which notice of action of said assessors was mailed to him and demands an investigation of said property by the mayor and council of the said city. 
Upon the filing of said appeal with the clerk of said city, it shall be the duty of the mayor to fix a day upon which said hearing will be had and give the appellant five days notice in writing of said hearing; notice to the agent or attorney at law of said appellant shall be sufficient. At said hearing said mayor and council shall hear all legal and competent testimony, and enter judgment accordingly. The appeal hearing hereinbefore provided for shall be signed by the tax payer, his agent or attorney at law. 
Sec. 18. - Notice of raising assessment. 
Immediately after report of said assessors is filed with the city clerk, it shall be his duty to mail a written or printed notice to each and every person the value of whose property, as returned for taxation, has been raised by the assessors, advising such person of the action of the assessors and specifying the property the valuation of which has been increased. 
Sec. 19. - Keeping intoxicating liquors for unlawful sale, prohibition of. 
The said mayor and council shall have power to prohibit, by ordinance, the keeping for unlawful sales any amount of whiskey, beer or intoxicating drinks, by whatever name or names the same shall be called; the keeping and maintaining of lewd women, or lewd houses; the keeping of any room or rooms for gambling; the having of any whiskey, beer or other intoxicating drinks for the purpose of sale or giving away on election day; the pursuing of one's ordinary avocation or labor on the Sabbath; from loitering or idling within the jurisdiction of said city. Police court of said city shall have jurisdiction to try persons for the commission of any of said offenses committed within the limits of said city, and upon conviction, punish offenders as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 20. - Police court. 
There shall be in the City of Woodbury a court known as police court of the City of Woodbury. Jurisdiction of said court shall extend to all offenses herein provided for, and all others of which municipalities are allowed jurisdiction under the laws of the State of Georgia, whenever said offenses are committed within the corporate limits of said city. Said police court shall be held by the mayor at such time and places in said city as in his judgment may be necessary. Said police court, upon conviction of any person or persons, may punish offenders by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, by confinement in a guard house or chaingang of said city for a term of not more than sixty days, either or all, in the discretion of said police court. 
Sec. 21. - Arrests. 
The marshal or marshals or police of said City of Woodbury shall have the power to make arrests as are now provided by the laws of this state for sheriffs and constables making arrests. 
Sec. 22. - Presiding officers of police court. 
All trials in the police courts of said City of Woodbury shall be presided over by the mayor or the mayor pro tem, who shall keep a docket upon which shall be placed each case which is for trial by him. 
Sec. 23. - Powers of police court. 
Said police court shall have power to punish for contempt against its lawful authority, whether in its presence or otherwise; to issue summons to witnesses, books, papers, in as full and complete a manner as the courts in this state may now do; to punish as for contempt failure to obey its legal summons; to grant continuances under rules of law; to take bonds and recognizances for appearances at its session, and to forfeit the same under rules and regulations as are now applicable in like procedure in superior courts of this state, and to do all other acts and things necessary for the proper enforcement of its authority as a court; provided, that no fine for contempt shall exceed the sum of ten ($10.00) dollars or imprisonment in a guard house for more than five days. 
Sec. 24. - Appeal. 
Any persons convicted in the police courts of said city for a violation of the ordinances or bylaws thereof, shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council of said city if said mayor and council shall see fit by ordinance to provide for such appeal. 
Sec. 25. - Commitments. 
The mayor and mayor pro tem of said city shall have, in addition to the jurisdiction of justices of the peace over all, the territory embraced in their jurisdiction or municipal offices. Whenever it shall appear that an offense against the laws of the state has been committed within the limits of said city's police jurisdiction, the mayor or mayor pro tem, as the case may be, after investigation, in his discretion may commit the offender or offenders to jail, or bail, to answer to the court having jurisdiction of the offense. 
Sec. 26. - Board of health. 
Said mayor and council shall have authority, in their discretion, to establish and put into operation a board of health, and to pass all ordinances and regulations, prescribing penalties for violation of the same necessary for purposes of maintaining such board of health, and providing penalties for such violation, to prevent the spread of any contagious or infectious diseases; also to have complete control of persons who have been exposed to contagious or infectious diseases; and to make any and all necessary arrangements for their protection and protection of inhabitants of said city. 
Sec. 27. - Building regulations. 
Said mayor and council shall have the right to exercise supervision over all buildings within the corporate limits of said city, and they shall have power to prevent the erection of any building within said city without the person or persons wishing to build first appealing to the mayor and council and obtaining a special permit; said permit shall specify the kind of building to be erected, the kind of material to be used in its construction, and the place where same shall be erected; this applies to all buildings or structures, however small the cost of erecting the same may be, or however insignificant the value of the building or structure may be when completed, and whenever in the judgment of the mayor and council any structure or building is dangerous to the life or health of the citizens, on proper case made in terms of the laws of the State of Georgia, they shall have the right to condemn such building as a nuisance, and call on the owner or tenant in possession to immediately abate the same; and in the event the owner or tenant in possession fails or refuses to abate such nuisance within a reasonable time, such a time to be determined by the mayor and council, then said mayor and council may cause the same to be done, and issue execution against said premises for the cost of abating such nuisance. Said mayor and council may likewise pass and enforce an ordinance fixing a penalty to be assessed against any party failing or refusing to abate a nuisance after such party has had notice to abate same. 
Sec. 28. - Public utilities; bonds, issuance of. 
The mayor and council shall have power to build, maintain and operate, should they see proper, street railways, waterworks, gas works, electric light wires, lines or systems or they shall have the power to grant right-of-way to railroads, street railways, waterworks, gas works, electric lights, telephone lines or wires throughout the streets and alleys of said city upon such terms, conditions and restrictions as said mayor and council may prescribe. 
Said mayor and council shall have power to issue bonds for the purpose of erecting, maintaining and operating any of said public utilities in the manner hereinafter provided, and whenever said mayor and council shall, in the exercise of their authority conferred in this Charter, find it necessary to take private property as they cannot agree with the owner or owners thereof as to compensation to be paid they may take such properties upon the following terms. 
Sec. 29. - Condemnation of property. 
Said mayor and council shall cause to be served such owner or owners, or his or their agents, written notice of their intention to condemn such property which notice must describe the property sought to be used, the time and place, when and where the proceedings to condemn such property will be held, which shall not be less than five days from the date of the service of such notice. 
Sec. 30. - Proceedings to condemn property. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and council to appoint one freeholder in said city, and the owner or owners of the property sought to be condemned, or his or their agents, shall appoint another freeholder; provided, that if said owner, or owners, or his or their agents, shall fail or refuse such freeholders, then the mayor and council shall appoint a second freeholder and the freeholders appointed in either of the above ways shall elect the third freeholder, and the three freeholders shall, after taking an oath to faithfully discharge their duties, hear all legal evidence offered by the parties and assess the damage or compensation to be paid to the owner or owners of such land, and under their award, which must be signed by at least two of such freeholders. Said award shall then be filed with the city clerk; should the first two freeholders, as above provided for, be unable to agree upon a third, then said mayor and council shall likewise appoint the third freeholder. 
Sec. 31. - Appeal from award of assessors. 
Provided, that either party dissatisfied with the award of the assessors may, within four days after the same filed, enter an appeal to the Superior Court of Meriwether County. The mayor and council may, after payment to owner or owners, or his or their agent, of the sum found by the assessors, proceed to appoint, lay off, straighten, or otherwise change said street, ward, alley or lane, and take said land pending an appeal by the owner or owners of any land sought to be condemned for such purposes. 
Sec. 32. - Quarantine regulations. 
Said mayor and council shall have authority to establish and maintain such quarantine and other regulations as in their judgment may be necessary to prevent the introduction or spread of any and all contagious or infectious diseases in said city. 
Sec. 33. - Fugitives from justice. 
Should any person violating any of the ordinances of said city flee from the jurisdiction thereof, he may be apprehended whenever he may be found in this state, and the warrant of the mayor or mayor pro tem of said city shall be sufficient authority for his return and trial upon the charge resting, and all persons escaping from custody of said city may be tried again for such escape, and punished not exceeding penalties hereinbefore provided. 
Sec. 34. - Election of subordinate officers. 
Said mayor and council shall have power and authority to elect the city marshal, who shall be the chief of police of the city and as many policemen as in their judgment, they may see proper; street overseers, attorney, city physician, and such other officers as the necessities of the city may demand; they may, by ordinance, prescribe the term of office and the duty of such officers and fix their salaries. 
Sec. 35. - Sanitary regulations. 
Said mayor and council shall have full power and authority to require the owner of any improved property, his agent or tenant in possession, to provide suitable privy or water closet accommodation upon such premises as may be prescribed by ordinance by the said mayor and council. 
Sec. 36. - Sanitation. 
Said mayor and council shall have power and authority, by ordinance, to provide suitable regulations on the subject of drainage, sewers and plumbing and all and everything else that may be necessary for improving of the sanitary condition of said city. Said mayor and council are authorized to lay down sewerage through private property in said city, or outside corporate limits of said city, if such be necessary for the public welfare; provided, before so doing, they shall regularly condemn such private property by the method hereinbefore laid down for the taking of private property by the state. 
Sec. 37. - Bonds, issuance of, for public utilities. 
Said mayor and council may have power and authority to issue bonds of said city in such sums and at such times as they shall see proper, not to exceed in the aggregate at any time the sum of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars, and of such denominations and in such amount as they see fit; said bonds are not to bear interest at a rate in excess of five per centum per annum and to run for a greater period than thirty years from their date of issue, but may bear a less rate of interest and run for a shorter period from their date of issue, in the discretion of the mayor and council. Said bonds to be issued, hypothecated and sold for the purpose of maintaining and operating a system of water works, system of sanitary sewerage, system of street railways, a system of public schools and the erection and furnishing of the necessary buildings for such school and for street paving. Said bonds shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk under the corporate seal of the town, and shall be negotiable in such manner as said mayor and council may determine to be for the best interest of the town; provided, however, that said bonds shall not be issued for the above said purposes until the same shall have been submitted to a vote of the qualified voters of said city and approved by two-thirds majority of the qualified voters of said town voting in such election. 
Sec. 38. - Election for bonds, when. 
Whenever it is deemed expedient by the mayor and council, they shall order an election to be held in said city for the purpose of determining whether or not there shall be an issue of bonds for any purposes hereinbefore provided, of which election there shall be given thirty days' notice by a publication in the organ in which legal advertisements of Meriwether County are published, and in some paper published in the City of Woodbury, and also by publishing a written or printed notice in three public or conspicuous places in said city, stating the day of election, the amount of bonds to be issued, for what purpose they are to be issued, what rate of interest they are to bear, whether the interest is to be paid annually or semiannually, and when bonds shall be finally paid off. Said election shall be held on the day published in said notice, at such place as may be determined by the mayor and council, which place must be designated in the notice of said election, and shall be held by the same person and in the same manner and under same rules and regulations as for mayor and council; same qualifications of voters of said elections shall be required at said election for mayor and council. That the ballots cast at said election shall contain the words "For Bonds" or "Against Bonds," and unless "For Bonds" shall receive a two-thirds majority of all the voters voting at said election, said bonds shall not be issued; but if "For Bonds" shall receive a two-thirds majority, said bonds may be issued. 
Sec. 39. - Free schools. 
The mayor and council of said city shall provide, by ordinance, such rules and regulations as to them may be proper in order to establish and maintain a system of free schools in said City of Woodbury, that all fees, forfeitures and costs arising from the police court of said city be used for school purposes. 
Sec. 40. - Grading, paving, assessments; lien of assessments; enforcement of collection of assessments. 
Mayor and council of said city shall have power and authority to grade, pave, macadamize, cove, or otherwise improve the streets and sidewalks, squares, public roads, lanes or alleys in said city with rock, brick, asphalt, or such other material as in the judgment of the mayor and council is most economical and durable. In order to carry into effect the above, said mayor and council shall have the power and authority to assess not more than two-thirds of the cost of paving or otherwise improving the streets and sidewalks, including two-thirds of the cost of curbing necessary on the real estate abutting on such a street or sidewalk. Said mayor and council shall have full power and authority to equalize by an ordinance passed for that purpose, the assessments against all real estate for the above purposes as to them seem just and proper, estimating the total cost of each improvement made and prorating the cost thereon on the real estate according to its frontage on the street or portion of the street so improved, or according to the area of said property, either or all, as may be determined by ordinance passed for that purpose. The amount of assessment on each piece of real estate shall be a lien on said real estate from the date of the passage of the ordinance providing for the work and making the assessments. The mayor and council shall have power and authority to enforce collection for the amount of an assessment so made for work, either upon the streets or sidewalks, by execution issued by the city clerk against the real estate improved and assessed for the amount assessed against the owner at the date of the ordinance making such assessments, which execution may be levied by the marshal or any policeman of said city on such real estate, and after advertising and other proceedings, as in case of tax sales, the same shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder. Such sale shall vest absolute title in the purchaser. Said city marshal, or policeman acting for him, shall have authority to eject occupants and put purchaser in possession; provided, the owner of such real estate shall have the right to file his affidavit denying the whole or any part of the amount for which execution is issued, and stating the amount which he admits to be due, which amount admitted to be due, together with all cost, shall be paid before the affidavit shall be received and the affidavit shall be returned to the Superior Court of Meriwether County and there tried and the issue determined, as in cases of illegality filed for the purposes of delay only. The mayor and council shall have power and authority to pave the whole surface of the streets, without giving any railroad or street railroad company, or other property holder occupant of the street the option of having the space to be paved by themselves or by contract at his or her instance, the object being to prevent delay and secure uniformity. The lien for assessments on abutting and on street railroads and other railroad companies for street or sidewalk paving, curbing, macadamizing, grading or draining shall have rank and priority of payment next in point of dignity to liens for taxes, such liens to date from the passage of the ordinance authorizing the work in each instance. Said mayor and council shall have power and authority to prescribe, by ordinance, such other rules as they, in their discretion, think necessary to grade, pave, drain, macadamize or curb the streets, sidewalks and alleys of said city and to collect the cost thereof by execution against the adjacent property owner and railroad companies or other occupants of the streets or alleys of said city. 
Sec. 41. - Tax to pay interest on bonds and create a sinking fund. 
Should the mayor and council determine, in accordance with the provision hereinbefore made, to issue bonds for any of the purposes hereinbefore set out, then they shall have power and authority in addition to all other taxes hereinbefore authorized, to levy and collect an additional tax not to exceed one per centum per annum sufficient to pay off said bonds, with all interest and charges on the same within the period which said bonds have to run, and it shall be the duty of said mayor and council, in the published notice of any election for the issuance of any bonds for any of the purposes herein provided, to state the amount of annual tax it will be necessary to levy and collect to pay the same. 
Sec. 42. - Officer sued for official act may plead justification. 
Any officer of the said corporation of the City of Woodbury who may be sued for any act or thing done in his official capacity may be justified under this Charter, and that the provision of this Charter may be pleaded and shall be a full defense to any action brought against the mayor and council of said city, or either of them, for any act or acts done by them, under and in accordance with its provisions and in accordance with the ordinances passed in pursuance thereof. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERAGE AND LIGHTING SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is 1919 Georgia Laws, page 1391, as adopted by the Georgia General Assembly. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Section numbers have been arbitrarily assigned to the provisions of this article, and history notes have been provided indicating the source of each section. 

Sec. 201. - Authority generally. 
The mayor and council of the City of Woodbury, in the County of Meriwether, and State of Georgia, in addition to the powers and authority already granted under the present Charter of said city, shall have full power and authority to construct, equip, maintain a system of electric lights or lighting plant, a system of waterworks, and a system of sewerage for said city, and to that end shall have full power and authority to acquire by purchase, gift or condemnation proceedings, all necessary lands, easements, water supplies and franchises. 
Sec. 202. - Condemnation of property. 
In the event said City of Woodbury cannot procure, by purchase, the necessary lands, rights of way of water ways for the construction of the system of lights, waterworks and sewerage, then the mayor and council of said city shall have the right to exercise the power of eminent domain, and to condemn such lands, easements, rights of way of water ways, and franchises, in manner and form as provided in chapter 9 of volume 1 of the Code of 1910 of the State of Georgia, and the amendments thereto. 
Sec. 203. - Purchase of land for water supply. 
Said mayor and council of the City of Woodbury shall have full power and authority to acquire by gift, purchase or condemnation in the manner aforesaid, all lands, easements and franchises necessary for water basin and watershed from which the public water supply may be obtained. 
Sec. 204. - Right to lay mains, erect poles. 
The mayor and council of the City of Woodbury shall have the right of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits and drains for waterworks and sewer purposes, and the right to erect post poles and wires for the purpose of conveying electricity and lighting said city, said rights to apply to the public highways of the County of Meriwether, and over and across and under the land of persons and corporations upon payment of just compensation that may be agreed upon or assessed as provided in said chapter 9 of volume 1 of Code of 1910 of this State. 
Sec. 205. - Election to authorize bond issue. 
The mayor and council of said City of Woodbury are hereby authorized and empowered to order and have held an election by the qualified voters of said city at such times as said mayor and council may designate to determine whether or not bonds shall be issued by the said City of Woodbury in a sum not to exceed the constitutional limitations to be sold for the purpose of establishing, constructing, equipping and maintaining a lighting plant, a system of waterworks and a system of sewerage for said City of Woodbury. Said election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of sections 440—444, inclusive, of the Code of Georgia of 1910, and at said election the ballots used shall be "For bonds for lights" and "Against bonds for lights," "For bonds for waterworks," "Against bonds for waterworks," "For bonds for sewerage," "Against bonds for sewerage." Said mayor and council shall have the power and authority to order an election for either lights, waterworks or sewerage bonds, or for either two or all of said purposes. Said mayor and council shall be required to advertise said election in a newspaper published in said city for a term of thirty days prior to said election, which notice shall specify in detail the amount of bonds to be voted on and the purpose of same. 
Sec. 206. - Bond issue. 
If said election herein provided for be in favor of bonds for all of said purposes or for either of said purposes, then the mayor and council of said City of Woodbury shall be and are hereby authorized to issue the amount of bonds, of the City of Woodbury so voted on, in a sum equal to the amount fixed by the mayor and council, for said purpose or purposes, which total sum shall not exceed the limit provided for in the constitution of this state. Said bonds shall be designated "lighting," "waterworks" and "sewerage" bonds of the City of Woodbury, as should result from the election so held and carried. Said bonds shall be issued in such denominations as may be fixed by the mayor and council of said city and for a term not to exceed thirty years, the rate of interest on said bonds shall be fixed by the mayor and council in such way as may seem most advantageous for said city after being advertised according to law. 
Sec. 207. - Taxes to pay bonds; sinking fund. 
The mayor and council of said City of Woodbury shall be and are hereby authorized and empowered to annually assess, levy and collect a tax on all property, both real and personal, corporate and franchise, in the corporate limits of said city; in such sums as may be right, proper and necessary for the specific purpose of paying the interest on said bonds, and also to create a sinking fund, sufficient to redeem and pay off such bonds at the maturity thereof, and the tax assessed, levied and collected shall be kept separate and distinct from all other taxes and moneys of said city and shall be used solely for the payment of the interest on said bonds as it may occur, and for the creation and accumulation of a sinking fund for the payment of the principal of the same. 
Sec. 208. - Second election. 
If the election herein provided for shall be against the issue of said bonds, that the mayor and council of said city may, at any time after the expiration of one year from the date of said election, order another election under the provisions of this act for either or all of said purposes. 
Sec. 209. - Condemnation of property for streets. 
The mayor and council of the City of Woodbury be and they are hereby empowered and authorized to condemn private and corporate property for the purpose of opening, laying out and establishing new streets in said city, and for the purpose of widening or changing any street already established in said city, said right of eminent domain to be exercised under the laws of this state as required in chapter nine of volume 1 of the Code of 1910 of this state. 
Sec. 210. - Cemetery. 
The mayor and council of said City of Woodbury shall have authority to acquire by purchase, gift or condemnation, land for the purpose of using same as a public burial ground or cemetery for the use of the citizens and the community. Said mayor and council shall have authority by ordinance to lay out said land so acquired into burial lots, and to fix the price therefor and to convey title to said lots to the purchasers for the purpose of a burial ground, and to provide by ordinance for the disposition of said funds and for the maintenance and control of said public cemetery. 
Sec. 211. - Condemnation of property for cemetery. 
In the event said City of Woodbury cannot procure by purchase the necessary lands to maintain a public cemetery or burial ground for said city and the rights-of-way thereto, then the mayor and council of said city shall have and are hereby empowered with the right to exercise the power of eminent domain and to condemn said land and rights-of-way thereto or passage to and from same in the manner and form as provided in chapter nine, Volume 1 of the Code of 1910 of the State of Georgia, and amendments thereto. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 
GENERAL PROVISIONS [1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Woodbury, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Woodbury City Code." 
(Code 1980, § 1-101) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" of the city council means an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire council. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Woodbury in the County of Meriwether and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the city council of the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, City of Woodbury, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Meriwether, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" means and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Woodbury" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Meriwether County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The terms "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1980, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1980, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1980, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of a chapter, section or subsection, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Woodbury, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1980, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1980, § 1-107) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty, continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided; and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 180 days, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 1-108) 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(1); any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); law enforcement, ch. 22; taxation, ch. 42; adminstrative and regulatory fee structure for occupation taxes, § 42-153; utilities, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Adoption of seal. 
The seal of the city shall be disc-shaped and shall have the words "City of Woodbury, Woodbury, Georgia" inscribed about the outer circumference and the words "Corporate Seal" inscribed across the center. 
(Code 1980, § 1-110) 
Sec. 2-2. - Records. 
All municipal records, except those which by order of a state court or by law are prohibited from being open to public inspection, shall be open for personal inspection by any citizen of the state during the hours of operation of the administrative service. 
(Code 1980, § 3-103(4)) 
State Law reference— Offenses involving public records, documents and other items, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1; inspection of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-6; records as public property, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102; records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e). 
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; exemptions from open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the mayor and council in the manner provided by the Charter and by the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-101) 
Sec. 2-32. - Election. 
The mayor and council shall be elected as provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 3-201) 
Sec. 2-33. - Qualifications for office. 
Candidates for the office of mayor or councilmember shall be qualified as provided in the Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 3-202) 
Sec. 2-34. - Vacancies. 
In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember, from failure to elect, death, removal or any other cause whatsoever, such vacancy shall be filled by a special election ordered by the city council to take place not more than 60 days from the time such vacancy occurs, under the same rules and regulations that govern other elections in the city, providing, as required by the Charter, a notice of the election at least 20 days before the election is to be held. The city clerk shall cause notice of the holding of such election, including the time and purpose of the election, to be published once a week for two weeks prior to such election in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The council shall further determine a qualifying period for candidates wishing to qualify for the vacancy, such period to be not less than 20 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the election. 
(Code 1980, § 3-203) 
Sec. 2-35. - Chair. 
The mayor shall act as chairman of the city council and is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The chairman shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. 
Sec. 2-36. - Committees. 
The mayor, with the concurrence of the city council, may create committees of members of the city council to study any issue before the city council. Any such committees may make recommendations to the city council, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to city councilmembers, committees may include other city officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the mayor with the concurrence of the city council. The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Code 1980, §§ 3-205, 3-206(6)) 
Sec. 2-37. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
Sec. 2-38. - Organizational meeting. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Tuesday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
Sec. 2-39. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the third Monday of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the city hall. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-204) 
Sec. 2-40. - Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. 
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the mayor for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-204(1)) 
Sec. 2-41. - Emergency sessions. 
When emergency circumstances occur, the city council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each councilmember as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
Sec. 2-42. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the city council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure; except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the city council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(11)) 
Sec. 2-43. - Quorum. 
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the city council. A quorum is a majority of all of the councilmembers then in office. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the mayor with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(3)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Voting; majority. 
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than half of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. Where a two-thirds majority is specified, a majority vote shall mean at least two-thirds of the councilmembers present excluding abstentions. In the event of a tie vote, the mayor shall vote to break the tie. 
Sec. 2-45. - Abstentions. 
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest that would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
Sec. 2-46. - Agenda. 
(a)  The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and the councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the city clerk to finalize the agenda. The mayor and all councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the councilmembers is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public; and all notice and record-keeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every city council meeting. 
(b)  Members of the public may request that a particular subject be placed on the agenda for the following meeting. To be considered, this request must be submitted in writing to the city clerk and received at least three business days before the meeting. 
(c)  The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the city council. A new subject that requires urgent attention may be added to the agenda during a meeting by a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(d)  A copy of the agenda and a list of those councilmembers present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
Sec. 2-47. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  A consent agenda may be prepared by the city clerk for the city council to unanimously adopt motions on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval and where no debate is expected may be placed on a consent agenda. 
(b)  At the appropriate time of the meeting, the mayor shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a councilmember objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the mayor shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the mayor will ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda will be adopted by unanimous consent. 
Sec. 2-48. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each city council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the city council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the city council but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the city council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the city council. 
(b)  The city council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the city council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the city council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(5)) 
Sec. 2-49. - Order of business. 
All regular city council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Roll call. 
(3)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(4)  Petitions and communications. 
(5)  Special committees. 
(6)  Unfinished business. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(1), (2), (4)) 
Sec. 2-50. - Decorum. 
(a)  All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the mayor and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the mayor. All comments made by a councilmember shall address the motion that is being discussed. 
(b)  The mayor shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The mayor can rule on the question or he may allow the city council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
Sec. 2-51. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the city council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk at least three business days before the city council meeting. These individuals will be allotted ten minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the city council. 
(2)  Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the city council may allow public comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the city council. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. Members of the public may speak for ten minutes and may only speak once. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the city council. Anyone wishing to speak at any city council meeting must be recognized by the mayor before addressing the city council. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a city council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the city council may be ruled out of order by the mayor or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the councilmembers will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the mayor. 
(4)  Public hearings. The mayor may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the city council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the city council or at such other places and times as the mayor may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(7)) 
Sec. 2-52. - Amendments to rules. 
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city clerk three business days before a regular meeting of the city council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a two-thirds vote of the city council to be adopted. 
Sec. 2-53. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a two-thirds vote of the city council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
Sec. 2-54. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
Secs. 2-55—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-81. - Rules of procedure. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order prescribed by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206) 
Sec. 2-82. - Parliamentarian. 
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for city council meetings. 
Sec. 2-83. - Main motion. 
In order for the city council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the city council has voted on that motion. 
Sec. 2-84. - Debate. 
(a)  After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the city council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the city council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the mayor. 
(b)  During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the city council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)  Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(10)) 
Sec. 2-85. - Voting; procedure. 
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote. 
b.  If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a city councilmember may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the city council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The mayor shall read the proposed motion to the city council and then call for the vote. 
Sec. 2-86. - Ranking of motions. 
(a)  Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the city council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)  A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list. 
(1)  Main motion (lowest rank). 
(2)  Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.  Postpone indefinitely. 
b.  Amend. 
c.  Refer to committee (commit). 
d.  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(3)  Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.  Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.  Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
(4)  Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.  Question of privilege. 
b.  Recess. 
c.  Adjourn (highest rank). 
Sec. 2-87. - Subsidiary motions. 
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the city council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow the city council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions: amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the city council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motions indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
a.  Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
b.  Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
c.  A motion cannot be amended more than two times. 
d.  Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. 
e.  A majority vote is required for the city council to adopt an amendment. 
f.  If the amendment is adopted then the city council shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the city council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the city council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the mayor will bring the original motion back to the city council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable, and a vote of two-thirds of the city council is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the city council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion, and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-88. - Privileged motions. 
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the city council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion, and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Sec. 2-89. - Incidental motions. 
Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a city councilmember. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the councilmember. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The councilmember may then debate the appeal. The councilmember shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the councilmember. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the councilmember to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required, and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
Sec. 2-90. - Supplementary main motions. 
Three motions allow the councilmember to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the councilmember to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider, and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the councilmember is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the councilmember will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the councilmember overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-46 (Agenda). The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, the councilmember shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the councilmember to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
Secs. 2-91—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances of a city council not to bind succeeding councils, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3; authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 2-111. - Legislative authority generally. 
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; however, such ordinance or resolution must not be in conflict with the Charter of the city, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the Constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 3-207) 
Sec. 2-112. - Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
Sec. 2-113. - Preparation of ordinances. 
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(a)) 
Sec. 2-114. - Required elements of ordinances. 
All ordinances passed by the city council shall contain the following items, which shall be set forth in the ordinance in the following order: 
(1)  Ordinance number. 
(2)  Title and purpose. 
(3)  Enacting clause. 
(4)  Body of ordinance by sections. 
(5)  Severability clause. 
(6)  Penalty clause, when applicable. 
(7)  Repealing clause, when applicable. 
(8)  Adoption date. 
(9)  Effective date. 
(10)  Authentication of city clerk. 
Sec. 2-115. - Preparation. 
All ordinances shall be prepared by the attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(b)(1)) 
Sec. 2-116. - Action restricted; emergencies. 
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced; except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(b)(2)) 
Sec. 2-117. - Reading of ordinances. 
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the city council. This subsection may be waived by two-thirds of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(b)(3)) 
Sec. 2-118. - Subject matter of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no ordinance, or section of such ordinance, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed. When practicable, all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(b)(4)) 
Sec. 2-119. - Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, contracts. 
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(8)(b)(5)) 
Sec. 2-120. - Effective date of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall take effect until five days after its adoption unless deemed an emergency measure, in which case the ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
(Code 1980, § 3-206(d)) 
Secs. 2-121—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); police chief, § 22-51 et seq.; officers of the police department, § 22-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-151. - Administrative policy and procedures for officers. 
Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, this Code, and such other duties not in conflict as may be required by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-103(1)) 
Sec. 2-152. - Oaths. 
All officers and employees required by the Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
I, ____________ , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Woodbury; and that I will to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of ____________ during my continuance therein, so help me God. 
(Code 1980, § 3-104) 
Sec. 2-153. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the mayor may require any department head, city official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the mayor. This bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of such duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations, or unlawful expenditures in office. The surety bond shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the mayor. The premiums shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 3-105) 
Sec. 2-154. - Compensation. 
Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by resolution. 
(Code 1980, § 3-106) 
Sec. 2-155. - Accidents. 
Employees involved in or having any knowledge of any accident involving any other person employed by the city or any property or equipment owned or operated by the city shall immediately report the accident and pertinent information to their department head, who shall forward such information to the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall record the information on three copies of the applicable accident form, one copy to be forwarded to the insurance carrier, one copy to the city attorney, and one copy retained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1980, § 3-601(2)) 
Sec. 2-156. - Municipal court judge. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. To be eligible to hold such office, the judge must meet the qualifications as set by state law. 
(Code 1980, § 5-102) 
Sec. 2-157. - Personnel provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance or resolution relating to the city's personnel classification system, employee pay plan, retirement plan, or employee benefits. All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out in this Code. 
Secs. 2-158—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR 

Sec. 2-181. - General authority. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties. 
(Code 1980, § 3-301) 
Sec. 2-182. - Preparation of annual report. 
The mayor shall prepare and present to the council such reports of the city's affairs, including a summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as he deems appropriate or as the council may, by majority vote, require. 
(Code 1980, § 3-302(5)) 
Sec. 2-183. - Executing legal documents. 
The mayor shall sign and execute all contracts, deeds and bonds of the city duly authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-302(6)) 
Sec. 2-184. - Rulemaking powers. 
The mayor shall have the powers to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to his authority, and to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whomever prescribed. 
(Code 1980, § 3-303(1)) 
Sec. 2-185. - Investigation. 
The mayor shall investigate and examine or inquire into, either by himself or by any officer or person designated for the purpose by him, the affairs or operation of any department, including the power to employ consultants and professional counsel when so authorized by the council to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries. 
(Code 1980, § 3-303(2)) 
Sec. 2-186. - Overriding. 
The mayor may set aside any action taken by a department head and may supersede him in the functions of his office. 
(Code 1980, § 3-303(3)) 
Sec. 2-187. - Delegation. 
The mayor may direct any department to perform the work for any other department and authorize any department head or officer responsible to him to appoint and remove subordinates serving under such person. 
(Code 1980, § 3-303(4)) 
Sec. 2-188. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law. 
(Code 1980, § 3-305) 
Secs. 2-189—2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK/TREASURER 

Sec. 2-211. - Election. 
The mayor shall, by and with the advice and consent of the city council at its first regular meeting after election and qualification, appoint a city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1980, § 3-401) 
Sec. 2-212. - Term of office. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall hold his office for one year, subject to removal for cause, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1980, § 3-402) 
Sec. 2-213. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city clerk/treasurer shall give a good and sufficient bond, payable to the city council, such bond to be fixed and approved by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-403) 
Sec. 2-214. - Duties as city clerk. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall have the following duties in his capacity as city clerk: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  To keep correct and full minutes of the proceedings of city council, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by it, in a properly indexed book or register kept for that purpose; 
(3)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and to place them before the mayor and city council at the meeting of council next succeeding their receipt; 
(4)  To issue all licenses, and keep a record of such licenses, and all badges and permits authorized by the council; 
(5)  To attend all sessions of the recorder's court; 
(6)  To keep an execution docket, in which he shall enter the names of all persons tried and fined by the municipal court, the nature of the offense, date of trial, amount of fine, and return of the police officer; 
(7)  To issue all summonses, processes and subpoenas to witnesses that may be necessary in the enforcement of this Code or other rules, regulations and ordinances of the city council; 
(8)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; and 
(9)  To carefully preserve the records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all such records and documents so that ready access to and use of such records and documents may be had. 
(Code 1980, § 3-404) 
Sec. 2-215. - Duties as city treasurer. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall have the following duties in his capacity as city treasurer: 
(1)  To receive all money due the city council, including taxes, and pay out the money only upon orders passed by the city council and signed by the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore; 
(2)  To keep a book of accounts showing all money received on behalf of the city and its source and disposition, which book shall be open for inspection by the public and city councilmembers; 
(3)  To maintain a uniform system of accounts and keep such other records and accounts as may be required by statute or ordinance; 
(4)  To furnish the mayor with quarterly statements detailing all receipts and payments of funds for the quarter; and 
(5)  To carry out such other obligations as may be specifically delegated to or demanded of him by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-405) 
Secs. 2-216—2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CODE OF ETHICS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

Sec. 2-251. - Preamble. 
(a)  The public judges its government by the way public officials and employees conduct themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed. 
(b)  All government, of right, originates with the people, is founded upon their will only, and is instituted solely for the good of the whole. Public officers are the trustees and servants of the people and are at all times amenable to them. Ga. Const. art. 1, § 2, ¶ 1. 
(c)  The people of this state have the inherent right of regulating their internal government. Government is instituted for the protection, security and benefit of the people; and at all times they have the right to alter or reform the government whenever the public good may require it. Ga. Const. art. 1, § 2, ¶ 2. 
(d)  The people have a right to expect that every public official will conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public confidence in and respect for the government he represents. 
(e)  Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public official, whether paid or unpaid, and whether elected or appointed, will uniformly treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law and avoid conflicts between their private self-interest and the public interest. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102) 
Sec. 2-252. - Policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
(b)  This code of ethics has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are compatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters that affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(1)) 
Sec. 2-253. - Scope of coverage. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all members of the city council, planning and zoning commission, board of zoning appeals, all advisory commissions, and committee members. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(2)) 
Sec. 2-254. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City officials or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, assistant city managers, city clerk, assistant city clerks, whether such person is salaried, hired or elected, and all other persons holding positions designated by the Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. "City official," unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this article by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Discretional authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. The interest of a councilmember in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions incidental to the extent that the councilmember would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity market value of the entity; 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeding $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(3)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-255. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No councilmember or member of any board or commission shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(b)  No councilmember or member of a board or commission, in any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(c)  No councilmember or member of a board or commission shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any board or commission. 
(d)  No councilmember shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with or related to the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No councilmember or member of any board or commission shall enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair in judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the board or commission on which he serves or to his supervisor and shall take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(j)  No city official or employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(4)) 
Sec. 2-256. - Conflict of interest. 
A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest; in addition, a city official or employee who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity may not participate in a vote or decision regarding funding by or through the city of the entity. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(5)) 
Sec. 2-257. - Exemption. 
This article shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any person's connection with or interest in any professional society or any charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization, or any similar organization not conducted as a business enterprise or government agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(6)) 
Sec. 2-258. - Penalty. 
Any persons violating any provisions of this article are subject to: 
(1)  Written and oral reprimand by the council, board, commission or committee of which such violator is a member. 
(2)  A fine as provided by section 1-11 of this Code to be imposed by the council, commission, board or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)  Request for resignation by the council, board, committee or commission of which the violator is a member. 
(Res. of 12-21-1999, § 3-102(8)) 
Secs. 2-259—2-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Department of police, § 22-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Expenditure of county funds for insurance and employment benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11.1; employment of additional temporary personnel and equipment for assistance of county officers or departments, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-291. - Department heads. 
All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the mayor for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned to the department; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with the approval of the mayor, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the mayor; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the mayor; 
(5)  Have power, when authorized by the mayor, to appoint and remove, subject to personnel regulations, all subordinates under him; and 
(6)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(Code 1980, § 3-103(2)) 
Sec. 2-292. - Departments. 
Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the mayor, any other department such service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(Code 1980, § 3-103(3)) 
Sec. 2-293. - Departmental organization. 
The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following departments and their heads: 

 
(Code 1980, § 3-701) 
Secs. 2-294—2-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 2-311. - Composition. 
The department of public works shall consist of the director of public works, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned by the mayor or council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-702(1)) 
Sec. 2-312. - Appointment of director. 
The director of public works shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of city council, and shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-702(2)) 
Sec. 2-313. - Duties of director. 
The director of public works shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To provide for and supervise the care, maintenance, construction and extension of all streets, sidewalks, street gutters and drains, alleys and public ways; 
(2)  To have charge of and be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the city water distribution system, and the street lighting system; 
(3)  To have charge of and supervision over all public property of the city not assigned to other public officers of the city; 
(4)  To have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse; 
(5)  To have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment of the city, and all buildings or places in which they are housed or kept; 
(6)  To be the custodian of all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city and not assigned to the care of any other public officer of the city; and 
(7)  To perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-702(3)) 
Secs. 2-314—2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF WATERWORKS AND SEWAGE TREATMENT 

Sec. 2-336. - Composition. 
The department of waterworks and sewage treatment shall consist of the director of waterworks and sewage treatment, who shall be head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-703(1)) 
Sec. 2-337. - Appointment of director. 
The director of waterworks and sewage treatment shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-703(2)) 
Sec. 2-338. - Duties of director. 
The director of waterworks and sewage treatment shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To provide for and supervise the care, maintenance and construction of waterworks, sewage treatment and spray field; 
(2)  To have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles and other equipment assigned to his department; 
(3)  To be the custodian of all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the city assigned to his department; 
(4)  To have charge of and supervision over all parks of the city; and 
(5)  To perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him from time to time by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-703(3)) 
Secs. 2-339—2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-351. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year which shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31. 
(Code 1980, § 4-301) 
Sec. 2-352. - Procedures for adoption of budget. 
The municipal budget shall be introduced, approved, amended, and adopted by ordinance passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of the city council. The municipal budget shall be introduced in writing by the mayor and adopted no later than the first regular council meeting in October of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1980, § 4-302) 
Sec. 2-353. - Capital program. 
(a)  A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the same time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(b)  The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1980, § 4-305) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage excise tax, § 42-2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous, malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1980, § 31-209) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
Sec. 6-2. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public street, public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud language, or conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-210) 
Secs. 6-3—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE MANUFACTURERS, DISTRIBUTORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49; levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means not less than five off-street parking spaces per package store. Such off-street parking shall have vehicular access to streets and shall be constructed of an all-weather surface. 
Alcoholic beverages means spirituous liquors. 
Business area means any area which is correspondingly zoned in accordance with the city zoning ordinance. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
College or school means such state, county, city, church or private schools as teach the subjects taught in the common schools of this state. 
Family means and includes any person related to the holder of a license issued under the provisions of this article within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the law of this state. 
Fortified wines are classed as liquor, and the term means any wines or beverages made by fermentation, to which there has been added distilled spirits and where the alcoholic content is more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the city. 
License means the authorization by the governing authority of the city to engage in the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Licensee means a person or persons, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this article. 
Manufacturer means a producer or bottler of vinous liquors or spirituous liquors. 
Package store means a geographic location within the city for which a license may be issued for the sale of packaged spirituous liquors. Such package store must be operated as a distinct business and cannot be operated in conjunction with or as a part of any other business, except as provided by this article and the law of the state. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building, wherein spirituous liquors are sold. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. 
Retailer means any person who engages in the retail sale of spirituous or vinous liquors. 
Spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverages containing alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whisky, gin, cordials or other spirituous liquors by whatever name called, to include fortified wines, as defined by state law. 
Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers, for the purpose of resale, any spirituous liquors. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - Purposes. 
This article has been enacted for the purpose of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the city; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of spirituous liquors; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)  Giving effect to existing land use; 
(5)  Preserving residential areas with reasonable consideration being given to the character of the area and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions; 
(6)  Sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; 
(7)  Protecting against the evils of the concentration of retail licenses for intoxicating liquors in one family or corporation; and 
(8)  Preventing an undesirable person from engaging in or having an interest in intoxicating liquors or their sale in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(2)) 
Sec. 6-33. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages within the city without having first complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(3)) 
Sec. 6-34. - Sale to minors, incompetents, drunkards prohibited. 
No licensee under this article shall sell alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any person in an intoxicated condition, or to any person known to such licensee or his employees to be an habitual drunkard, or to any person known to such licensee or his employees to be of unsound mind. The licensee shall be responsible for the actions of his employees in regard to this section. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(29)) 
Sec. 6-35. - Sale to minors; advertisement. 
The holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall post in the most conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO MINORS IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED." 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(30)) 
Sec. 6-36. - Hours of operation. 
No retailer shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage at any of the following times: 
(1)  Sundays. 
(2)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the governing authority. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(31)) 
Sec. 6-37. - Coin-operated devices and similar machines prohibited. 
No retail dealer in spirituous liquors by the package shall permit on his premises any slot machines, mechanical music boxes, pinball machines, machines operated for amusement purposes, games of chance, punchboards, vending machines, lotteries or tickets of chance or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value, except only coin-operated machines for dispensing tobacco products. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(39)) 
Sec. 6-38. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, drink or possess any spirituous liquors. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place wherein minors are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any spirituous liquors. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or other person to buy spirituous liquors or other alcoholic beverages and furnish them to a minor for consumption. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age. A state driver's license, which is apparently valid upon its face, may be accepted by the licensee or his employee as evidence of age. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(40)) 
Sec. 6-39. - Wholesalers. 
All wholesalers selling and offering to sell distilled spirits within the corporate limits of the city shall file a letter of intention with the city clerk, naming the salesman who will represent the wholesaler, and shall state in the letter their state license number. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(43)) 
Secs. 6-40—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 6-61. - Required. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon forms to be prepared and provided by the city clerk. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  The nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(4)  If a partnership, the name of all partners, whether general or limited; 
(5)  If a corporation, the name of all officers, and all stockholders; 
(6)  The names of all persons who have or will have a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license if issued; and 
(7)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by this article or by the mayor or council, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before filing. 
(b)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records pertinent to the application which may be requested of them by the mayor and council of the city. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation, any person requested by the mayor and council and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or the license issued under the terms of this article. Failure to produce such person or persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this article. 
(c)  Each applicant shall submit as a part of his application a statement by a registered land surveyor showing compliances with all distance requirements contained in this article. 
(d)  The city shall require not less than 30 nor more than 60 days processing any application for license under the terms of this article. 
(e)  Upon filing of the application with the city clerk, the applicant shall deposit in cash or by certified check a processing fee of $25.00 to cover the expense of investigation, and processing the application, which fee shall not be refundable. 
(f)  Upon approval, in accordance with the terms of this article of an application for license, the license fee shall be paid by certified check prior to the issuance of a license and within ten days after approval. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(4)) 
Sec. 6-62. - Time of application. 
(a)  Licenses shall be valid only for one calendar year as indicated on the license, and no license may be automatically renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before December 15 of the preceding year. 
(b)  The form of such application shall be the same as that used for the initial license application. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(5)) 
Sec. 6-63. - Advertisement of application. 
All applicants for licenses under this division shall give notice of the making of an application by advertisement at least once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of a hearing of such application, in a newspaper published in and having general circulation in the county, which notice shall contain a complete description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners whether limited or general, and if a corporation, the names of the officers and all stockholders, and the date and time the mayor and council will hear such application. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(6)) 
Sec. 6-64. - Limited to designated area. 
No license granted under this division to engage in the sale of packaged liquors shall be granted except in an area zoned for commercial or industrial use in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(7)) 
Sec. 6-65. - Citizenship and residence requirements. 
No license for the retail sale of spirituous liquors by the package shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States and who has not resided continuously within the county for a period of five years prior to the date of the application. Where the applicant is a corporation, all the stockholders must meet the requirements contained in this division; and the license shall be issued to the corporation and the stockholders jointly. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements contained in this division shall be met by all partners, whether general or limited. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(8)) 
Sec. 6-66. - Issuance to persons with prior conviction prohibited. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages or for the operation of a package store shall be issued to any person where any individual having any interest, either as owner, partner, stockholder, or having a direct or indirect beneficial or absolute interest, or the spouse of any such person, shall have been convicted of or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within a period of five years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any misdemeanor of any state or of the United States, or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations or shall ever have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere for a felony of any state or of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(9)) 
Sec. 6-67. - Application; character. 
Any applicant for a retail liquor license must be of good character; and associates for any person having financial interest in, as well as all managers, clerks or other employees, shall be of like character or the application will be refused. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(10)) 
Sec. 6-68. - Limitation on number within a family or corporation. 
(a)  No application for retail license to sell spirituous liquors in the package at retail shall be granted where the person applying for such license and/or members of such person's family and/or stockholders in such person's corporation and/or partners in such person's partnerships already hold an interest in a license to sell spirituous liquors by the package at retail within the state. No person and/or member of his family, partnership or corporation shall own, hold or control any interest whatsoever in more than one license to engage in the business of selling spirituous liquors by the package at retail in the city or in any other city, town or county. 
(b)  As used in this section, an interest in the license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license, a co-owner of the license, a general or limited partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license, a stockholder in any corporation which owns all or any part of a license, an owner, lessor, sublessor of, or stockholder in any corporation owning or leasing, any real estate which is occupied by a retail liquor store, or shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a retail liquor store. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section, no person shall be deemed to have more than one interest in any one license. 
(c)  All applications for license, whether original or for renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest, as defined in subsection (b) of this section, in retail liquor stores. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling packaged liquor at retail, together with any interest each person or members of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
(2)  The amount of rental paid for the land and building, and the manner in which it is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all persons having any total, partial, beneficial or any other interest in and to the land and building on and which the retail liquor store is to be located; 
(4)  A copy of the proposed lease; and 
(5)  Any other information requested by the mayor and council pertinent to the application under investigation. 
(d)  Any change in any of the relationships and/or ownership interest contained on the application must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days after change is made and the failure to do so shall be grounds for immediate cancellation and revocation by the mayor and council of any license issued under this division for the immediate dismissal of any application for a license under this division. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(11)) 
Sec. 6-69. - City officials prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any elected official or any employee of the city, his spouse or children, to have any hold, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell any alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(12)) 
Sec. 6-70. - Application; building plans and specifications. 
No retail liquor license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with the ordinances of the city and regulations of the state revenue commissioner as well as the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed or remodeled by the city or its agents. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lights so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of the building. Each applicant for a retail liquor license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or a proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(13)) 
Sec. 6-71. - School or church location. 
(a)  No retail liquor license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church or beyond 200 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway as provided by law. Regardless of distance, no retail liquor license shall be granted to any person whose business premises would abut the property line of any church, school grounds or college campus. 
(b)  Each application for retail liquor license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this article with reference to this section. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(14)) 
Sec. 6-72. - Location of business; distance from residence. 
No license under this division shall be issued to any proposed location which is within 50 feet of any private residence. This distance shall be measured in all directions from the nearest wall enclosing the proposed premises where alcoholic beverages are to be sold to the nearest point of any residential property line. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(15)) 
Sec. 6-73. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building in which a retailer proposes to operate under the provisions of this article is at the time of application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city clerk and show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city. No sales shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with such plans and specifications and is in conformity with all other provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(16)) 
Sec. 6-74. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this division must, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within six months after the issuance of such license shall serve as the automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license, and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this division who shall begin the operation of the business authorized in the license, but shall for a period of six consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall upon expiration of such six-month period automatically forfeit such license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council; and no refund of license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(17)) 
Sec. 6-75. - License fees; amount; penalty. 
(a)  All annual license fees under this section shall be paid in advance, on or before January 1, of each year; and any new license granted under this section during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration. 
(b)  Each person manufacturing or selling spirituous liquors in the city, except wholesalers not maintaining a place of business in the city, shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Any person licensed under this division shall be required to renew his license on or before January 1 of each year. A penalty of ten percent of the license fee shall be assessed for failure to renew the license on or before January 1. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(18)) 
Sec. 6-76. - Bond. 
Before any retail liquor license is granted, the applicant must post with the governing authority, along with his application, a personal performance bond, to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the governing authority after a hearing is held by the governing authority after a three-day written notice is given the violator. This bond is to be payable to the city in the amount of $1,000.00 and shall be approved by the governing authority and executed in a form to be furnished. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(19)) 
Sec. 6-77. - License constitutes grant or privilege. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this division shall constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on or conduct a business covered by such license during the term of the license, subject to the terms and conditions imposed by the Charter, this article and other applicable ordinances of the city and the constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States applicable to such licenses. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WOODBURY AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(20)) 
Sec. 6-78. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended or revoked for due cause and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing to be held shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances other than traffic ordinances or failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises, or the violation of any other part of this article. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized to suspend any license issued under this division for and during any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and this suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(21)) 
Sec. 6-79. - Automatic revocation of city license upon revocation of state license. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any such product within the city shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any further action by the mayor and council or any officer of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(22)) 
Sec. 6-80. - False information. 
Any material omission from or untrue or misleading information which is contained in an original or renewal application for a license under this division shall be cause for the denial or refusal of a license; and if any license has previously been granted under such circumstances, such action shall constitute due cause for revocation of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(23)) 
Sec. 6-81. - Restriction upon transfers. 
No license under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(24)) 
Sec. 6-82. - Surrender upon revocation. 
In the event of the revocation of any license for the closing of a licensed business, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender the license to the governing authority and to remove all evidence of the sale of spirituous liquors from the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(25)) 
Sec. 6-83. - Restrictions on other mercantile establishments. 
A licensee of a retail establishment under this article shall not operate such business in connection with any other mercantile establishment, except a retail store selling package beer and wine, and then only if such package beer and wine store sells only beer, wine and other items of convenience normally associated with the retail sale of package beer, and then only if such package beer and wine is sold only for carry-out purposes. No such retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display, or keep in stock at his place of business where packaged, spirituous liquors are offered for sale any other product or commodity, except: 
(1)  Wines (if licensed); 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits, but no beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in such place of business; and 
(3)  Tobacco products. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(26)) 
Sec. 6-84. - List of employees to be filed. 
It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to sell alcoholic beverages to file with the city the names of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees, must be filed with the city clerk within three days from the date of any such change. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(27)) 
Sec. 6-85. - Employees; prohibitions. 
(a)  No licensee shall employ in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity whatsoever who has been convicted in this state or in any other state, or in the United States, or in any other country within five years immediately prior to the application for employment, of any felony or misdemeanor other than traffic offenses. 
(b)  No licensee under this division shall employ any person under the age of 21 years to sell, take orders for, or deliver, or in any manner take part or assist in the sale or delivery of such alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(28)) 
Sec. 6-86. - Keeping or storing without appropriate license prohibited. 
(a)  No licensed retailer shall keep any liquor stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby liquor ordered by him is stored for him by any licensed wholesaler. 
(b)  A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of liquor at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business his storage space for liquor shall be immediately adjacent to the room in which he is licensed to do business. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(32)) 
Sec. 6-87. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the building covered by the license. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(33)) 
Sec. 6-88. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees under this article or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(34)) 
Sec. 6-89. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
Each retail licensee under this article shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than three copies of a printed price list of the liquors for sale; however, a licensee in lieu of having three copies of the printed list may have the price placed on the bottle or on the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(35)) 
Sec. 6-90. - Retention of copy of article. 
All holders of a license for the sale of liquor shall keep a copy of this article in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to the terms of this article, and each licensee or his agents selling liquor shall be at all times familiar with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(36)) 
Sec. 6-91. - Inspection. 
The business premises of the holder of a retail liquor license for the sale of liquor shall be open to inspection at any and all times by officers and officials authorized to conduct such inspection. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(37)) 
Sec. 6-92. - Exterior advertisement prohibited. 
No signs of any kind, painted or electric, advertising spirituous liquors, beer or wine for sale or advertising any brand or price of spirituous liquors shall be permitted on the exterior of the premises. No placard or sign which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any liquor sold in the premises; except tags showing the price of individual bottles or containers may be affixed to such bottle or containers or the edge of the shelf where such bottles or containers are located. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(38)) 
Sec. 6-93. - Consumption on premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises licensed for the sale of packaged liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on such premises. If such licensee shall also have a license to sell malt beverages or wine, it shall likewise be unlawful for any of such items to be consumed on the premises where alcoholic beverages sale is licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(41)) 
Sec. 6-94. - Possession without payment of tax prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any liquor on which the tax has not been paid. Each wholesaler shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as a reimbursement for collection of the tax. 
(b)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the governing authority a summary of all purchasing invoices for liquor sold to each retailer in the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. These invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 1980, § 32-203(42)) 
Secs. 6-95—6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MALT BEVERAGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local license required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 6-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brewer means any person who manufactures malt beverages. 
License means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale of malt beverages, beer, wine or spirituous liquors in the city in one of the following classes: 
(1)  Class A license (retail package store). A class A license shall authorize the retail dealer to sell malt beverages, beer, wine or spirituous liquors in the package only and not for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Class B license (on-premises consumption). A class B license shall authorize the retailer to sell malt beverages, beer or wine in its original package and/or for consumption on the premises. Spirituous liquors are prohibited from sale by a class B licensee. 
(3)  Class C license (grocery store, convenience store). A class C license shall authorize the retail dealer to sell malt beverages, beer or wine in the package only and not for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Class D license (wholesale). A class D license shall authorize the sale by any person of malt beverages, beer, wine or spirituous liquors to a licensed retail dealer for the purpose of resale only. 
Retail dealer means a person licensed by the city to sell malt beverages, beer, wine or spirituous liquors at retail within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(10); Ord. of 9-15-1998, § 32-201(10)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-132. - License required. 
Each brewer, wholesale dealer and retail dealer of malt beverages who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(1)) 
Sec. 6-133. - Fee established. 
The annual license fee for malt beverage brewers, retail dealers, and wholesale dealers whose place of business is located within this city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(2); Ord. of 9-15-1998, § 32-201(2)) 
Sec. 6-134. - Publication of notice of application for license. 
No application for a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages within this city shall be acted upon by the city council until after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(3)) 
Sec. 6-135. - Factors for council consideration. 
The full council, in passing upon an initial application for a malt beverage license at the final meeting on the application, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments selling malt or alcoholic beverages to the proposed location; 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location; 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location; 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons; 
(5)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards; 
(6)  The feelings and attitudes of the citizens residing in the area adjacent to the proposed location; 
(7)  The information set forth in the application; 
(8)  Whether any malt or alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked for cause by the city council; and 
(9)  Whether the applicant has ever sold malt or alcoholic beverages illegally in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(4)) 
Sec. 6-136. - Change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(5)) 
Sec. 6-137. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(6)) 
Sec. 6-138. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Class A license (retail package store). A class A licensee shall not sell, dispense or deliver beer, malt beverages, wine or spirituous liquors between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(b)  Class B license (on-premises consumption). A class B licensee shall not sell, dispense, serve or deliver beer, malt beverages or wine: 
(1)  Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday through Saturday; 
(2)  From 12:00 midnight on Saturday to 6:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(3)  Such licensee shall close its doors to business and cease to do business at or before 1:00 a.m. and must remain closed until 6:00 a.m. on each day of the week. 
No loitering shall be allowed by anyone outside the building of a class B licensee. The public shall not be allowed in any place outside the building housing the licensed establishment that is not fully lighted and visible from the public street. The term "loitering" shall mean to linger outside the building housing the licensed establishment for a period longer than five minutes without leaving the premises or entering the building. 
(c)  Class C license (grocery store, convenience store). A class C licensee shall not sell, dispense, or deliver beer, malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(7); Ord. of 9-15-98, § 32-201(7)) 
Sec. 6-139. - Furnishing malt beverages to minors, intoxicated persons and habitual drunkards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, or cause to be furnished, or to permit any person in his employ to furnish malt beverages to any person under the age of 21 years, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or to any habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to such person. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(8)) 
Sec. 6-140. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city to any licensee under this article may be suspended or revoked for due cause and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing to be held shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances other than traffic ordinances or failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises, or the violation of any other part of this article. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized to suspend any license issued under this article for and during any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 32-201(9)) 
Secs. 6-141—6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WINE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local license required for wholesale or retail sales of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40. 

Sec. 6-161. - License required. 
Each person engaged in the business of retailing wine shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(1)) 
Sec. 6-162. - Fee established. 
The annual license fee for each place of retail wine distribution in the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(2); Ord. of 9-15-1998, § 32-202(2)) 
Sec. 6-163. - Publication of notice of application for license. 
No application for a license for the sale at retail of wine within this city shall be acted upon by the city council until after notice shall have been run in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for at least ten days prior to the regular meeting at which such application is to be presented and considered. Such notice shall contain the name of the applicant and the location of the proposed business, and shall be run at the applicant's expense. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(3)) 
Sec. 6-164. - Factors for council consideration. 
In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to sell wine at retail, the mayor and council shall be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(4)) 
Sec. 6-165. - Change of location. 
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall permit the sale at retail of wine only on the premises described in the application. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(5)) 
Sec. 6-166. - Furnishing wine to minors, intoxicated persons and habitual drunkards. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, or cause to be furnished, or to permit any person in his employ to furnish wine to any person under the age of 21 years, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or to any habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to such person. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(6)) 
Sec. 6-167. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the retail sale of wine shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(7)) 
Sec. 6-168. - Hours of sale. 
It shall be unlawful to sell wine at retail except during those hours authorized for the retail sale of malt beverages. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(8)) 
Sec. 6-169. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Any license issued by the city to any licensee under this article may be suspended or revoked for due cause and after a hearing held for the purpose of considering such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing to be held shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinances other than traffic ordinances or failure of the licensee or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of the law or ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring inside the premises, or the violation of any other part of this article. 
(c)  The mayor is authorized to suspend any license issued under this article for and during any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and this suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1980, § 32-202(9)) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any creature, domestic or wild. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the immediate control of some person either by leash, cord, chain or other restraint. 
Dangerous animal means any wild or domestic animal which because of its size, disposition, or other characteristics would constitute a danger to humans on their property if not confined. Any species of dog designated as a pit bulldog shall be prima facia considered a dangerous animal. 
(Code 1980, § 30-101; Ord. of 1-17-1989) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-2. - Inoculation. 
All dogs and cats within the city shall have an unexpired rabies inoculation tag at all times, and such tag shall be displayed on the animal. 
(Code 1980, § 30-102) 
Sec. 10-3. - Restraint of animals by owner. 
The owner of each dog, cow, horse, pig, goat or poultry shall not allow such animal to run at large in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 30-103) 
Sec. 10-4. - Impoundment of animals by city. 
The city may impound all dogs, cattle, horses, swine, goats or poultry running at large in the city, or may issue a citation to the owner, or both. 
(Code 1980, § 30-104) 
Sec. 10-5. - Notice of impoundment. 
The owner, if known, of any impounded animal shall be notified as soon as practical. 
(Code 1980, § 30-105) 
Sec. 10-6. - Disposal of impounded animals. 
Any impounded animal may be destroyed on the third day of the notice required in section 10-5 unless the owner claims the animal and pays a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for the impoundment and feeding. Such sums do not include any fines which may result from citations issued for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 30-106) 
Sec. 10-7. - Disposal of dead animals. 
If any dead animal is found upon a public right-of-way, the city may remove and dispose of it and charge the owner a fee, depending upon the costs incurred by the city, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 30-107) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 34. 
Sec. 10-8. - Restraint of dangerous animals. 
Any animal found as a dangerous animal under this chapter shall, at all times, be confined by its owner to a pen, cage or other enclosure which shall prevent the animal from coming in contact with any person other than the owner of the animal or an invitee of the owner. If such confinement consists of a fenced yard, such fence shall be of a type to prevent access to the yard by children of tender years. 
(Code 1980, § 30-109; Ord. of 1-17-1989) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; construction or repairing of buildings, § 18-89; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Self inspection by plumbers, utility contractors. 
The city is exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) relating to the self-inspection of certain water and sewer lines, and such provisions shall not be applicable in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-5-1996) 
Secs. 14-2—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 14-31. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following codes, the latest edition as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced by the city. 
(1)  Standard Building Code. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code. 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code. 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings. 
(b)  The following appendixes of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendix. 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendix. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code: Appendix. 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendix. 
(5)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendix. 
(6)  National Electrical Code: Appendix. 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code: Appendix. 
(c)  The latest edition of the following codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are adopted by reference as though they were copied fully: 
(1)  Standard Housing Code, including chapter 1, Administration and Appendix. 
(2)  Standard Swimming Pool Code, including chapter 1, Administration. 
(3)  Standard Excavation and Grading Code, including chapter 1, Administration. 
(4)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, including chapter 1, Administration. 
(5)  Standard Existing Building Code, including chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix. 
(6)  Standard Amusement Device Code, including chapter 1, Administrative and Appendix. 
(Code 1980, §§ 36-101—36-105; Ord. of 9-27-1996) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25. 
Sec. 14-32. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the construction or erection of any building, whether commercial, business or residential, unless such construction is accomplished in strict compliance with the various construction codes adopted by this article. 
(Code 1980, §§ 36-101—36-105; Ord. of 9-27-1996) 
Sec. 14-33. - Enforcement. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the various construction codes adopted by this article, the designated city official shall be deemed to be the responsible official for the enforcement of such codes. 
Sec. 14-34. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  A conviction of any provision of the various construction codes adopted by this article shall automatically suspend the business license of the offending contractor. The license may be reinstated by an application to the city council upon a showing of good cause. 
(Code 1980, §§ 36-101—36-105; Ord. of 9-27-1996) 
Sec. 14-35. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 12-15-1998, § 36-111) 
Sec. 14-36. - Public utilities. 
(a)  No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection for construction purposes unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. 
(b)  No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
(c)  No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 50. 
Sec. 14-37. - Water supply and sewage disposal facilities. 
(a)  Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas, conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
Secs. 14-38—14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Water efficiency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 14-61. - Purpose of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to: 
(1)  Require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; 
(2)  Require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; 
(3)  Promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; 
(4)  Maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and 
(5)  Reduce wastewater flows. 
Sec. 14-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead and bathroom or lavatory and kitchen faucets and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1991, § 20-114) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-63. - Standards for fixtures. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 14-65. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992; and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 

 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low-consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1991, §§ 20-115, 20-116) 
Sec. 14-64. - Product certification. 
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 14-63 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
Sec. 14-65. - Exceptions. 
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 14-63 for the following: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes that cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1991, § 20-118) 
Sec. 14-66. - Enforcement; penalty for violation of article. 
Citations for violations of this article may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, such person found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 5-14-1991, § 20-119) 
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; building, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 30; solid waste, ch. 34; collection of hazardous waste, § 34-64; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38; utilities, ch. 50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13); the Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-31—18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 18-51. - General prohibition. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the responsible person upon notice by the mayor or his duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void; and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(1)) 
Sec. 18-52. - Permit required. 
Open burning may be allowed in the city upon application for a permit to do so on forms provided by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(2)(a)(1)) 
Sec. 18-53. - Conditions for issuance of permit. 
No permit for open burning shall be issued unless the mayor or his duly designated agent is satisfied that: 
(1)  There is no practical available alternate method for the disposal of the material to be burned; 
(2)  No hazardous condition will be created by such burning; 
(3)  No salvage operation by open burning will be conducted; and 
(4)  No leaves will be burned in those areas where provision is made for public collection. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(2)(a)(2)) 
Sec. 18-54. - Imposition of limitations. 
Any open burning permit issued by the clerk may be limited by the imposition of conditions to: 
(1)  Prevent the creation of excessive smoke; or 
(2)  Protect property and the health, safety and comfort of persons from the effects of the burning. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(2)(a)(3)) 
Sec. 18-55. - Notice of imposition of limitations. 
If it becomes apparent at any time to the mayor that limitations need to be imposed for any of the reasons stated in section 18-54, the mayor or his duly designated agent shall notify the permittee in writing; and any limitations so imposed shall be treated as conditions under which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(2)(a)(4)) 
Sec. 18-56. - Burning without permit allowed. 
Open burning may be done in the city without a permit under this division as follows: 
(1)  In those areas where provision for public collection of leaves is not made, the open burning of leaves is permitted. 
(2)  In those areas where regular refuse collection is not provided, open burning of ordinary household trash by householders is permitted, provided that: 
a.  The fires are located no closer than 500 feet to any neighboring habitable dwelling or place where people work or congregate; 
b.  Garbage, dead animals and animal waste are not burned; and 
c.  Materials which create dense or excessive smoke or emissions injurious or noxious to people or property are not burned. 
(3)  Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty of any public officer if the fire is necessary for one or more of the following reasons or purposes: 
a.  Prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
b.  Instruction of public firefighters or industrial employees under supervision of the fire chief; or 
c.  Protection of public health. 
(4)  Fires may be used for the cooking of food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(5)  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(6)  Fires may be set in the course of agricultural operations in growing crops or raising fowl or animals, provided no nuisance is created. 
(7)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created. 
(Code 1980, § 13-102(2)(b)) 
Secs. 18-57—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Noise, dust and debris from excavations, § 38-86. 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler that causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 18-81. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise that unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 14-101) 
Sec. 18-82. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses that are noncommercial in character. 
(4)  Areas located outside of platted subdivisions or more than 1,750 feet from a platted subdivision. 
(Code 1980, § 14-103) 
Sec. 18-83. - Enumeration. 
The acts contained in this article, among others, shall constitute a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
Sec. 18-84. - Horns; signaling devices. 
The following shall be a violation of this article: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city except as a danger warning. 
(2)  The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(3)  The use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity. 
(4)  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
(5)  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(1)) 
Sec. 18-85. - Radios, phonographs, other machines or devices that produce or reproduce sound. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener shall be a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(2)) 
Sec. 18-86. - Loudspeakers; amplifiers; other devices for production or reproduction of sound for advertising. 
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instruments, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or city council shall be a violation of this article. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer, in person, and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(3)) 
Sec. 18-87. - Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing. 
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-88. - Animals and birds. 
The keeping of any animal or bird that will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(6)) 
Sec. 18-89. - Construction or repairing of buildings. 
The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building official shall be a violation of this article. Such permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed by the city council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the city council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the city council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(4)) 
Cross reference— Building, ch. 14. 
Sec. 18-90. - Transportation of metal rails, pillars or columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-91. - Piledrivers, hammers, other such appliances. 
The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise, without a special permit from the city council shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-92. - Blowers. 
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases of fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-93. - Sound trucks. 
The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-94. - Steam whistle. 
The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-95. - Exhausts. 
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(5)) 
Sec. 18-96. - Defect in vehicle or load. 
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be a violation of this article. 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 46. 
Sec. 18-97. - Loading; unloading; opening boxes. 
The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-98. - Vehicle repair in residential areas. 
The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the residents of the area shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(7)) 
Sec. 18-99. - Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. 
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(8)) 
Sec. 18-100. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public entertainment events shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, §§ 14-102(9), 32-205(8)) 
Sec. 18-101. - Noises to attract attention. 
The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 14-102(10)) 
Sec. 18-102. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
The operation of motor vehicles, including cars, trucks, motorcycles, upon any parking facility, public or private, so as to create unreasonable noise and to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the inhabitants of the neighborhood shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-103. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents of this city shall be a public nuisance and may be subject to summary abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 14-105) 
Secs. 18-104—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-131. - Definition. 
A nuisance is anything within the city that causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another, and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only 
one of fastidious taste; but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable person. Any such nuisance may be abated as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 33-101(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 18-132. - Enumeration of nuisances. 
(a)  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(b)  The following are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things that interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of the community. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of reasonable persons residing in the neighborhood. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause disturbance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading; and smoke shall be defined and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(6)  Vacant lots. Any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate and remain in such a manner as to create a fire hazard or other hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Nonconforming structures, machines, etc. Any building, business, thing, machine or machinery, erected, repaired, conducted, maintained, operated or used contrary to or in violation of any of the fire and safety regulations of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(8)  Animal enclosures. Any enclosure in which any animals are kept, dog kennels or runs and other animal or fowl pens wherein manure, dung, filth or litter is allowed to accumulate. 
(9)  Dead animals. The carcass of any dead animal of any kind on any premises within the city. 
(10)  Depositing trash, garbage, refuse, etc., on private or public property. The depositing and leaving on private or public property of trash, garbage, refuse, scrap building materials, paper, cardboard containers, brick, cement, rubbish, tree residue, cans, containers, or any other rubbish or trash that is a menace to public health and safety in the city or which unreasonably annoys others. 
(11)  Unoccupied buildings. Unoccupied buildings that are not properly whitewashed or cleansed. 
(12)  Unsafe vehicles, machinery, etc. Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards). The absence of a license plate for the current year and/or the absence of a current motor vehicle registration shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle is junked. 
(13)  Gutters or spouts. Any gutter or spout that conveys filth into any street, lane or alley of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-502) 
Sec. 18-133. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-502) 
Sec. 18-134. - Issuance of summons for abatement. 
Whenever any nuisance exists within the city, or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under any of the ordinances of the city, and the responsible owner or other person refuses or fails after reasonable notice to demolish, remove or abate the nuisance, the chief of police, or the officer having responsibility for enforcement, may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for such condition, describing the condition complained of and specifying the ordinances or parts of ordinances claimed to be violated, and requiring such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified in the summons, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Code 1980, §§ 31-502(1), 33-102(1)) 
Sec. 18-135. - Order for abatement. 
(a)  If the municipal judge at the hearing required by section 18-134 shall determine that a condition does exist as alleged that constitutes a nuisance or a condition which under this Code or the ordinances of the city is required to be, or is subject to being, demolished, removed or abated, the judge shall issue his order and judgment so finding and shall order the property owner or other responsible person to demolish, remove or abate the condition within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. The order shall provide how the condition is to be abated, including but not limited to rehabilitation or demolition of any buildings or structures located on the property in question. The order shall further provide that if the property owner or other responsible person shall fail to comply with the order within the time specified, the city shall be authorized to proceed without further notice to demolish, remove or abate such condition and to take whatever action deemed necessary to demolish, remove or abate such condition; and the expense shall be charged against the owner of the property in question and shall be a lien against the property upon which the condition existed, ranking equally with the lien for city taxes. 
(b)  Execution shall issue for such costs as in the case of city taxes, and the procedure for the enforcement of the execution shall thereafter be the same as in the case of city taxes. 
(Code 1980, §§ 31-502(2), 33-102(3)) 
State Law reference— Authorization and procedure for abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 18-136. - Special provisions for old, unused, stripped, junked automobiles. 
(a)  Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped, junked and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, and/or equipment and personal property of any kind that is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of 30 days or more (except in licensed junkyards) within the corporate limits of this city is a nuisance. 
(b)  The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot within the corporate limits of this city upon which the storage of property is made, and also the owner, owners and/or lessees of the property involved in such storage shall jointly and severally abate the nuisance by the prompt removal of the property into completely enclosed buildings authorized to be used for such storage purposes, if within the corporate limits of the city, or otherwise by removing it to a location without the corporate limits. 
Sec. 18-137. - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth in sections 18-134 and 18-135. 
Sec. 18-138. - Service on nonresidents and others. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the city to proceed under sections 18-134 and 18-135 and the owner of the property or other responsible person resides outside the city limits, or cannot be found after diligent search, service of the notice required by section 18-135 shall be made by posting a copy of the notice on the property involved, and by publishing the notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks, the last notice to be not longer than ten days nor less than one day prior to the hearing. Where the address of the person to be served is known, or where there is a last known address, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the person at such address by certified mail. In all cases where personal service cannot be made upon such person within the city limits, the case shall proceed as quasi in rem, and the execution shall issue in rem. 
Sec. 18-139. - Other powers preserved. 
Nothing in this article shall in any way affect the power and authority of the municipal judge to punish for any violations which the conditions may constitute, nor shall it affect the power and authority of the judge to punish by contempt the failure to comply with his order. 
(Code 1980, § 33-102(4)) 
Secs. 18-140—18-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEGETATION 

Sec. 18-161. - Certain weeds, grasses and plants declared a nuisance; exemptions. 
(a)  Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city, and any weeds, grasses or plants other than trees, brushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city are hereby declared to be nuisance, subject to abatement as provided in this article. 
(b)  Garden flowers, vegetables, cultivated agricultural crops, ornamental shrubbery and trees shall not be considered weeds, grass or vegetation within the meaning of this section. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply only to property located within subdivisions of record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, and to the original city lots. They shall not apply to undeveloped areas of unsubdivided land within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-501) 
Sec. 18-162. - Height. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, tenant or other person having the possession and control of real property, or responsible for its management, maintenance or upkeep, to permit the growth and accumulation of weeds, grass or other vegetation to a height in excess of 12 inches above the ground. 
(Code 1980, § 31-501) 
Sec. 18-163. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  For a violation of this article, the owner of the property shall be given notice to remove such excess growth within seven days from the receipt of the notice. Such notice may be served personally, or may be served by registered or certified mail, or by attaching a copy of the notice to the principal entrance of the dwelling, and shall contain a description of the location of the property upon which such condition exists. 
(b)  Where notice is given by registered or certified mail, the depositing of such notice in the United States mail by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner of the property at the address shown on the latest ad valorem tax return of such owner for such property shall constitute sufficient service of such notice, where the return receipt shall be duly returned signed by the addressee or someone residing on the premises, or where the return receipt or other notification from the federal postal service indicates that the notice was refused, or that there was a refusal to sign the return receipt or that delivery of the notice at such address could not be made. 
(Code 1980, § 31-501(1)) 
Sec. 18-164. - Abatement by city; notice of abatement. 
(a)  Upon the failure to comply within the required time by the owner of the property when properly notified pursuant to the provisions of section 18-163, the city is authorized to have the contractor enter upon the property; and the contractor is authorized to enter the property, and cut and remove the weeds, grass and vegetation. The city shall issue a lot cleaning order to the contractor, who shall promptly perform the work and submit his bill to the city. The city shall inspect the work and if satisfactory, shall approve the bill for payment and forward it to the city treasurer for payment. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall promptly send to the owner of the property a statement of account demanding payment on or before a date named in such demand, which shall not be earlier than 15 days nor later than 45 days after payment to the contractor. 
(c)  If payment under subsection (b) of this section shall not have been made on or before the date named, the city treasurer shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the property and signed by the municipal judge, notifying such owner to show cause before the judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue against the property in accordance of subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  If it shall appear at such hearing that the property was in violation of this article, that the notice required of section 18-163 was given, that the work was performed and the cost paid by the city, and that the city has not been reimbursed, execution shall issue for such amount, signed by the treasurer and shall be executed by the chief of police in the same manner as tax executions are executed. 
(e)  If the owner of the property is unknown, or cannot be located, the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply; but in lieu thereof a notice shall be published once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, which notice shall be addressed "To Whom It May Concern"; shall describe with reasonable particularity the property involved; shall include a statement of the amount due for the removal of the weeds, grass or other vegetation; and shall notify all persons interested to show cause before the municipal judge at a time and place and on a date named in the notice why execution should not issue in rem against the property for such amount. In such event, subsection (a) of this section will apply; but the execution shall issue against the property in rem. 
(Code 1980, § 31-501(2)) 
Sec. 18-165. - Remedies. 
The remedies provided in this article are cumulative of all other remedies the city has for the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as relieving any person from the obligation to comply with this Code, all ordinances, laws and regulations of the city. Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit the maintenance by any person of a nuisance. Any nuisance shall be subject to be abated in the manner provided by law. 
Sec. 18-166. - Award of contracts for clearing of lots by city. 
Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the city shall obtain bids from contractors or other qualified persons for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation not in excess of two inches in diameter, and for clearing lots of weeds, grass and other vegetation in excess of two inches but not in excess of four inches in diameter; and the city council shall award a contract to the lowest and best bidder, such contract to remain in effect during the ensuing fiscal year. 
Secs. 18-167—18-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 

Sec. 18-191. - Nuisance declared. 
A violation of any provision of this division is a nuisance. 
Sec. 18-192. - Keeping water in which mosquitoes may breed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless such collection of water is so treated as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  The collections of water prohibited by subsection (a) of this section shall be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, or other similar water containers. 
Sec. 18-193. - Treatment of collections of water. 
The method of treatment of any collections of water that are specified in section 18-192 directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the health officer and may be one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material that will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers together with their thorough drying and cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer. 
(4)  Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days. 
(5)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(6)  Filling and draining to the satisfaction of the health officer, his agent or accredited representative. 
(7)  Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
Sec. 18-194. - Mosquito larvae as evidence of breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there; and failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the health officer, his authorized agent or representative, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-195. - Failure to remedy conditions after notice. 
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the breeding, within three days after due notice has been given to him, the health officer or his authorized agent is authorized to do so; and all necessary costs incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as the case may be. 
Sec. 18-196. - Right of entry of health officer. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this division, the health officer, or his duly accredited agent under his authority, may at all reasonable times lawfully enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction. 
Secs. 18-197—18-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1; used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Which is left unattended on a public street, road, highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle; 
(4)  Which has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without the owner's having made claim to the vehicle; or 
(5)  Which has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone's having made claim to the vehicle. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle means a motor vehicle or trailer. 
Owner means the owner, lessor, lessee, security interest holders, and all lienholders as shown on the records of the state department of revenue. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-222. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit, or cause or permit to be stored or deposited, any abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-503) 
Sec. 18-223. - Removal required. 
Any abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle shall be removed upon ten days' written notice to the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the motor vehicle is stored or deposited, or to the owner if the identity of such owner of the motor vehicle can be ascertained through license plates or otherwise. If such motor vehicle is not removed after ten days' written notice, the police department of the city shall remove the vehicle or cause the removal and sale at the cost of the owner or occupant of the premises, or the owner of such motor vehicle or motor vehicles, if such owner can be ascertained. Sale shall be made to the highest of two bids obtained from dealers in such property. 
Sec. 18-224. - Notice of removal to owner and state. 
(a)  Any person who removes a motor vehicle from public or private property at the request of someone other than the owner or who stores any motor vehicle which has been left unattended shall seek the identity of the owner of such vehicle and shall, within 15 days of the day such vehicle became an abandoned motor vehicle, give notice in writing to the state department of revenue and the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, stating the manufacturer's vehicle identification number, the license number, the fact that such vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle, and the present location of such vehicle, and requesting the name and address of all owners, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of such vehicle. If a person removing or storing the vehicle has knowledge of facts which reasonably indicate that the vehicle is registered or titled in a certain other state, he shall check the motor vehicle records of that other state in the attempt to ascertain the identity of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Upon ascertaining the owner of such motor vehicle, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall, within three days, by certified or registered mail, notify the owner, lessors, lessees, security interest holders, and lienholders of the location of such vehicle and of the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
(c)  If the identity of the owner of such motor vehicle cannot be ascertained, the person removing or storing such vehicle shall place an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where such vehicle was obtained or, if there is no newspaper in the county, shall post such advertisement at the county courthouse in such place where other public notices are posted. Such advertisement shall run in the newspaper once a week for two consecutive weeks or shall remain posted at the courthouse for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall contain a complete description of the motor vehicle, its license and manufacturer's vehicle identification numbers, the location where such vehicle was initially left unattended by the owner, the present location of such vehicle, and the fact that such vehicle is deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of if not redeemed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2. 
Secs. 18-225—18-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity; also known as the plan. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition. This includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping in any combination, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority which has been certified by the director as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., or the division, in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including but not limited to clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means the state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Roosevelt Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed, as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First-order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any adjacent area subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-252. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in division 3 of this article. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the state water quality control act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20—12-5-53. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet; and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet; but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet; and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of division 3 of this article and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, which shall include: 
a.  Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; 
b.  Feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; 
c.  Producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; 
d.  Producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; 
e.  The production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; and 
f.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds. 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(7)  Any project involving 1.1 acres or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters; and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways that have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them yearround; however, any person responsible for a project which involves 1.1 acres or less that involves land disturbing activity and that is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and further, nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project if not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (8) or (9) of this section. 
(8)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority, or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by the city; however, such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(9)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, but any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in sections 18-332 and 18-333. 
(b)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in sections 18-332 and 18-333, the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued; and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permitholders. 
Sec. 18-253. - Inspection of permitted sites; notice to comply; failure. 
The city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
Sec. 18-254. - Right of entry. 
The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
Sec. 18-255. - Refusal of entry or access. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
Sec. 18-256. - Review of issuing authority's actions; deadline for corrective action. 
(a)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of the city which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission, or both, may provide technical assistance to the city for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the city's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(b)  The division may periodically review the actions of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include but shall not be limited to review of the administration and enforcement of this article and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the mayor and council. If such review indicates that the mayor and council has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the mayor and council in writing. The mayor and council so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the city does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the city as an issuing authority. 
Sec. 18-257. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining such permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
Sec. 18-258. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
Sec. 18-259. - Bond forfeiture. 
If through inspection it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 18-292. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
Sec. 18-260. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions, or stop work order shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
Sec. 18-261. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
Sec. 18-262. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
Sec. 18-263. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
Secs. 18-264—18-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-291. - Review of ordinances regulating land development by applicant. 
The landowner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances that regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only person who can obtain a permit. 
Sec. 18-292. - Application requirements. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the mayor and council to perform such activity. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city clerk and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Such plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 18-333. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of sections 18-332 and 18-333. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(c)  A fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges shall be charged for each acre or fraction of an acre in the project area. 
(d)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district and any variances required by subsections (15) and (16) of section 18-333 and bonding, if required as per subsection (e) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(e)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the erosion and sedimentation act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, in any combination up to, but not exceeding $3,000.00 per acre or fraction of an acre of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
Sec. 18-293. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements contained in this section and section 18-292. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(b)  Data required. Data required for the site plan are as follows: 
(1)  Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sedimentation control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land uses at the project site and description of the proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(5)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project, including the statement in bold letters that the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities. 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
(9)  Detailed drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  A maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(c)  Certification of plans; contents. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(2)  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., that might be affected. 
(7)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(8)  Delineation of the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
(9)  Delineation of the 100-foot horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(10)  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(d)  Maintenance of control practices. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
Sec. 18-294. - Permits. 
(a)  Issuance or denial. Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, provided that variances and bonding are obtained where necessary. 
(b)  Approval of plan prior to issuance. No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 18-292 and 18-293 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 18-292 are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  Phased development; separate permits. If the tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation or modification. The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(e)  Certification of payment of ad valorem taxes required for issuance. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the tax commissioner and the city clerk certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
Sec. 18-295. - Injury by permitholder to property of another. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
Secs. 18-296—18-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-331. - Plans to contain control measures and practices; application and installation. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of sections 18-332 and 18-333. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities, and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
Sec. 18-332. - Best management practices. 
(a)  Best management practices as set forth in this section and section 18-333 shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this section, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(b)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where BMPs have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten NTUs for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(c)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain BMPs shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
Sec. 18-333. - Conservation and engineering practices. 
The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices, to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission, as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on the site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 18-332(b). 
(15)  Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; however, buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5 of chapter 5 of the Metropolitan River Protection Act shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. 
(16)  Land disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the state water quality act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-20—12-5-53, unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
Sec. 18-334. - Adoption of requirements exceeding article standards. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions that contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in sections 18-332 and 18-333. 
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 26; traffic, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF POLICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-291 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and personnel as the mayor shall prescribe. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(1)) 
Sec. 22-32. - Rank. 
Following the police chief in rank shall be the captain, the lieutenants, the sergeants, and the police officers, in order as prescribed by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(2)) 
Secs. 22-33—22-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE CHIEF[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-151 et seq. 

Sec. 22-51. - Appointment and powers. 
The police chief shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall be the chief executive officer of the police department, subject always to the orders and regulations of the mayor. In the exercise of his duties, the police chief shall have the power to establish and enforce rules and regulations for the governance of the members and employees of the department, which rules shall, however, be approved by the mayor, and be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(3a)) 
Sec. 22-52. - Bond and oath. 
Prior to entering upon the discharge of his duties, the police chief shall execute a bond in such amount as shall be required by the mayor and council and shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(3b)) 
Sec. 22-53. - Duties. 
The police chief shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To attend all meetings of the city council when requested by the mayor and all trials before the municipal court; 
(2)  To see to the proper service of all summonses, subpoenas, citations, executions, attachments and rules of the city council; 
(3)  To see to the collection of all fines and costs imposed by the municipal court; 
(4)  To see that the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and all applicable statutes are faithfully enforced; 
(5)  To preserve the public peace, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators; 
(6)  To protect the rights of persons and property; 
(7)  To oversee the conduct of the officers and men of the police force, and to be held strictly responsible for such conduct and for the general good order of the department; 
(8)  To keep adequate records of all personnel and equipment of the department, including a log of all questions, activities and investigations; 
(9)  To submit a monthly report to the city council, when requested by the mayor, outlining the number and type of arrests for state offenses, the number and type of cases involving violations of municipal ordinances, and the number of arrests made and cases reported by police officers; 
(10)  To submit monthly to the state department of public safety the uniform crime report prescribed by state law (see O.C.G.A. § 35-3-36); 
(11)  To discharge such other duties as may be required of him by the mayor; and 
(12)  To keep all equipment, uniforms clean and neat, and shoes shined. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(3c)) 
Sec. 22-54. - Resignation, removal, death or disability. 
In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the police chief, the mayor shall appoint the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been duly appointed. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(3d)) 
Secs. 22-55—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFFICERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-151 et seq. 

Sec. 22-81. - Qualifications. 
Any person employed by the city as a police officer shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least 21 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States; 
(3)  Have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent; 
(4)  Not have been convicted, by any state or by the federal government, of any crime the punishment for which could have been imprisonment in a federal or state prison or institution; nor shall he have been convicted of sufficient misdemeanors to establish a pattern of disregard for the law; 
(5)  Be fingerprinted and a search made of local, state and national fingerprint files to disclose any criminal record; 
(6)  Possess good moral character as determined by investigation under procedure established by the state peace officers standards and training council; 
(7)  Have an oral interview with the mayor and city council to determine such things as the applicant's appearance, background and ability to communicate; 
(8)  Be found, after examination by a licensed physician or surgeon, to be free from any physical, emotional or mental conditions which might adversely affect his exercising the powers or duties of a police officer; and 
(9)  Complete satisfactorily at least a basic course of 114 hours of instruction within 12 months of the date of his appointment as a police officer, except that an extension may be granted by the state peace officers standards and training council on account of illness, injury, military service or other reasons deemed sufficient by the council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(4a)) 
Sec. 22-82. - Bond and oath. 
Prior to entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of the police department shall execute a bond in such amount as shall be required by the mayor and council and shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(4b)) 
Sec. 22-83. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all applicable statutes, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the police department, and to respect and obey all orders of the mayor and police chief not in conflict with the law or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(4c)) 
Sec. 22-84. - Conduct. 
Every member of the police department shall conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Prohibited conduct shall include but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Absence from regular hours of duty without permission; 
(2)  Sleeping on duty; 
(3)  Insubordination or disobedience of orders; 
(4)  Drinking any malt or intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform; 
(5)  Willful maltreatment of any person or prisoner; 
(6)  Using profane language; 
(7)  Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business or operation of the police department without the consent of the mayor; 
(8)  Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty; 
(9)  Accepting bribes of money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kind from a person arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in custody or after his release or discharge; or 
(10)  Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duty. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(4d)) 
Sec. 22-85. - Penalties for improper conduct. 
Any police officer violating the rules or regulations of the police department or of this Code, upon conviction by the city council, after due notice and hearing, or upon the plea of quilty, shall be reprimanded, fined, suspended or dismissed by the city council. Any one or more of such penalties may be imposed in the discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(4e)) 
Sec. 22-86. - Arms and uniforms. 
Each officer and member of the police department shall be furnished with such uniform, arms and police equipment as provided for by the city council. Uniforms shall be kept clean and pressed and shall be worn on duty at all times, unless otherwise ordered by the mayor. The equipment, arms and uniforms furnished by the city shall be and always remain the property of the city and shall be, when a change is ordered or on retirement from office, returned to the city. The members of the department shall be liable on their bonds for any loss or careless destruction of or damage to their arms and uniforms. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(5)) 
Sec. 22-87. - Arrests. 
Police officers of the city may make arrests for violations of municipal ordinances and state laws when such violations are committed in their presence or when they have obtained a valid arrest warrant from the mayor, or from some other proper authority. In exercising such power of arrest, all police officers shall see that all necessary warnings are given to the accused as required by law. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(6)) 
Sec. 22-88. - Entering private dwellings. 
No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(7)) 
Sec. 22-89. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property. 
(a)  All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where the property has been stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of 30 days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of the property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. 
(b)  If after the expiration of 30 days the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall advertise the property for sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed. Such advertising shall take place at least 14 days before the date set for the sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. 
(Code 1980, § 3-704(8)) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 22; traffic, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Criminal impersonation. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual to solicit contributions or donations by pretending to represent a charitable organization when the individual is not duly authorized to represent the organization. 
(Code 1980, § 31-301) 
Sec. 26-2. - Fire or bankrupt sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise merchandise for sale under the term "fire sale" when in fact the merchandise has not been damaged by fire. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise property for sale under the term "bankrupt sale" when in fact the person is not bankrupt or has not filed bankruptcy proceedings. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise merchandise for sale under the term "going out of business" sale when in fact the person continues to do business at the termination of the sale. 
(Code 1980, § 31-302) 
Sec. 26-3. - Peddlers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell or otherwise accept money for any article of merchandise or any service as a result of door-to-door solicitation without having first obtained a permit from the city to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 31-303) 
Sec. 26-4. - Advertising matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any advertising matter, bills, dodgers, circulars, cards and signs by placing it on any tree, pole, shrub, vehicle, streets or buildings within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-304) 
Sec. 26-5. - Obstruction of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train or streetcar to direct the operation of or operate the vehicle in such manner as to prevent the use of any street or purpose of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1980, § 31-401) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
Sec. 26-6. - Speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train or streetcar passing through the corporate limits of the city to allow the train or any part of the train to exceed the speed of 25 miles per hour while the train or part is within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-402) 
Secs. 26-7—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-31. - City property. 
It shall be unlawful to destroy or damage any property of the city. Within the meaning of this section the term "destroy or damage" shall include putting a piece of property to a use for which it was not intended. 
(Code 1980, § 31-101) 
Sec. 26-32. - Equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by the city or directed by an employee of the city to tamper with or operate in any manner any equipment or machinery of the city. It shall also be unlawful to paint, tamper with, deface or otherwise misuse any police or fire equipment of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-102) 
Sec. 26-33. - Public buildings. 
It shall be unlawful to deface or damage any building accessible to the public by a city street or sidewalk within the city limits. 
(Code 1980, § 31-103) 
Sec. 26-34. - Cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful to disturb, deface or otherwise damage any graves, headstones, markers or flowers placed upon a grave. 
(Code 1980, § 31-104) 
Sec. 26-35. - Trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously cut, injure or destroy any tree on the sidewalk, streets or public places of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-105) 
Secs. 26-36—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-61. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 31-201) 
Sec. 26-62. - Disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and tranquility of any of the citizens of the city in the corporate limits of the city by making such noise so as to disturb the rest of the inhabitants of a dwelling within the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-202) 
Sec. 26-63. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm within 500 yards of any street, alley or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant or to discharge at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead to any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1980, § 31-203) 
Sec. 26-64. - Public disturbance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to recklessly or knowingly engage in any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Code 1980, § 31-204) 
Sec. 26-65. - Sirens. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized member of the police or fire department of the city or the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle to sound any siren within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-205) 
Sec. 26-66. - Ballplaying. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching or batting a ball on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 31-207) 
Sec. 26-67. - Bonfires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, during a holiday or any other time, to build a bonfire of any description within the city limits except at places approved and designated by the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 31-208) 
Sec. 26-68. - Assembling. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble for the purpose of playing and betting for money or other things of value. 
(Code 1980, § 31-211) 
Sec. 26-69. - Safety of public areas; loitering. 
(a)  No person shall remain or loiter upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as business or store parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages, beer or wine upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as business or store parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(c)  No person shall deposit any garbage, refuse, rubbish or litter which would constitute a danger to a pedestrian or a motor vehicle upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as business or store parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(d)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any other person is placed in fear or safety of his life, limb or health, or whereby the property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(e)  No person shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct. 
(f)  No person shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(g)  No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(h)  No person shall jostle, roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(i)  No person shall use fighting words or loud and boisterous language directed towards another so as to create a breach of the peace potentially dangerous to the safety of person or property. 
(j)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed or ordered by the city police to clear such public way or place. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, private parking facilities and associated walkways shall be considered a public way or place if such facilities are intended for use by the general public. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, business or store parking lot means any privately owned parking lot providing free parking during business hours adjacent to any store, office building, commercial building or industrial building, for the convenience of employees and customers and patrons. 
(k)  No person shall remain on any business parking lot at any time during which his presence is prohibited by the owner. The posting of a sign by the owner to such effect shall be proper notice. 
(Ord. of 11-14-1989, § I(31-212)) 
Secs. 26-70—26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 26-91. - Emergency declaration of curfew. 
The mayor is authorized to issue an emergency declaration of curfew when, in his judgment, circumstances warrant an immediate declaration. Such curfew shall not exist for more than 48 hours and in order to make such curfew valid, the mayor shall, upon issuance, declare in his order the events which have caused the curfew to be issued, the duration of such curfew, the area of the city to be involved in the curfew, the ages of the citizens affected, and the activities which are prohibited. If the curfew applies only to minors, it shall declare under what circumstances minors may be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1993, § 6-102) 
Sec. 26-92. - Formal declaration of curfew. 
The mayor and council in a properly called meeting may issue a formal declaration of curfew by setting forth in a resolution the circumstances or events which are the basis for the issuance of the curfew, the length of time the curfew shall be in effect, the area of the city involved in the curfew, the ages of the citizens affected by the curfew, and the activities which are prohibited. If the curfew applies only to minors, the resolution shall declare under what circumstances minors may be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1993, § 6-103) 
Sec. 26-93. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any parent, guardian or other person having control of a minor to permit the minor to violate any curfew declared under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1993, § 6-104) 
Sec. 26-94. - Dissemination of information. 
As soon as any curfew is declared under this article, the mayor and council shall inform all local media of its adoption and shall issue written bulletins to be disseminated in the affected areas. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1993, § 6-105) 
Sec. 26-95. - Police enforcement. 
The police department is charged with the responsibility of enforcing the terms of any curfew issued under this article. Enforcement shall be full and uniform and without discrimination of any kind. The violation of the terms of any curfew issued under this section shall be considered a violation of this Code subject to the penalties of section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-22-1993, § 6-106) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

Sec. 30-1. - Development of municipal recreation programs. 
The mayor and council shall have the power and authority from time to time to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure interest and needs of all municipal citizens, and the mayor shall have the power to create a park and recreation board and to vest the board with the authority to maintain playgrounds, recreation centers and associated buildings and to develop, maintain and operate all types of recreational facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 23-101) 
Sec. 30-2. - Use of grounds and facilities in general. 
Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1980, § 23-102(1)) 
Sec. 30-3. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person using public parks, grounds or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or their parts or appurtenances; signs, notices, or placards whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts, or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or any part of a tree or plant. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile, or bird, or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Disturb the peace or use any profane or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting. 
(9)  Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park. 
(10)  Violate any rule for the use of the park made or approved by the mayor and council. 
(11)  Prevent any person from using any park or any of its facilities or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(12)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park except in such waters and at such places as are provided for such activity, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this chapter. 
(13)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 23-102(2)) 
Sec. 30-4. - Hours of operation. 
The public parks, tennis courts and other areas shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person other than city officials and city personnel conducting city business to occupy or be present in such public areas during other hours. 
(Code 1980, § 23-102(3)) 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, § 10-7; building, ch. 14; environment, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; state Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; litter control law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; however, this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation means the performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site means the location or land area where the final deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludges; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in rules of the department of human resources, chapter 270-5-20, relating to radioactive materials. 
Industrial waste means waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Open dump means a disposal site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn or otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Putrescible wastes means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes and garbage. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Sanitary landfilling means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover on the waste. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except water-carried body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manures, industrial wastes, residue from incineration, food-processing wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this chapter. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposing of solid wastes, in any combination. 
Transfer station means a facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
(Code 1980, § 12-102) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-2. - Enforcement. 
Generally. The director of public works shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In the exercise of his solid waste management duties, the director shall: 
(1)  Supervise the collection of solid waste, including the operation and maintenance of equipment and the supervision of personnel; 
(2)  Establish collection schedules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Supervise the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfill and/or other disposal sites or facilities; and 
(4)  Inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to ensure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 12-103(1)) 
Sec. 34-3. - Limitations of authority. 
All regulatory actions of the director of public works shall be subject to the review of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1980, § 12-103(2)) 
Sec. 34-4. - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a requirement of or a fee charged by the director of public works shall have the right to appeal to the mayor and council, which body may, upon hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1980, § 12-103(3)) 
Secs. 34-5—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTAINERS 

Sec. 34-31. - Types. 
(a)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, watertight, nonabsorbent, rust-resistant, rodentproof, and easily cleanable. They shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 35 gallons; except that bulk containers of a type accepted by the director of public works as suitable for mechanical collection by publicly owned equipment used for such collection may be used. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or which have defects causing them to scatter waste upon the ground during collection or causing them to hamper or to injure the persons collecting waste shall be promptly replaced. 
(b)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(Code 1980, § 12-104(2)) 
Sec. 34-32. - Rubbish. 
Rubbish may be stored for collection in paperboard boxes or other throwaway containers strong enough to retain the waste; loose paper or cuttings shall be tied in bundles. Rubbish containers or bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Limbs or cuttings shall not exceed four inches in diameter nor four feet in length. Rubbish containers or bundles shall be placed for collection beside the solid waste containers. 
(Code 1980, § 12-104(3)) 
Sec. 34-33. - Placement. 
On days designated as collection days for the respective routes by the director of public works, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning the garbage or rubbish, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1980, § 12-104(4)) 
Sec. 34-34. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(Code 1980, § 12-104(5)) 
Secs. 34-35—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 34-61. - Precollection generally. 
No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this chapter or under the express prior approval of the director of public works. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director of public works by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove the waste. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this article and subject to penalties set forth in this article. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(Code 1980, § 12-104(1)) 
Sec. 34-62. - Frequency. 
Garbage and rubbish shall be collected on such schedules as the mayor and council shall determine. 
(Code 1980, § 12-105(1)) 
Sec. 34-63. - Limitations. 
Industrial waste, large animals over 30 pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping or processing operations will not be collected, transported or disposed of by public facilities; but such waste collection, transportation and disposal shall be by the owners and/or generators of such waste or animals. 
(Code 1980, § 12-105(2)) 
Sec. 34-64. - Hazardous waste. 
It shall be a violation of this article to place or to cause to be placed in any container, box or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the director of public works. 
(Code 1980, § 12-105(2)) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
Sec. 34-65. - Collection vehicles. 
Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept clean and in good repair. They shall be constructed in such manner that the contents cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. They shall be readily identifiable by letters not less than three inches high and easily legible, painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in an equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, state permit number, truck number and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director of public works following his measurement of the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(Code 1980, § 12-105(3)) 
Sec. 34-66. - Private contractors. 
No person other than employees of the city shall collect, transport or dispose of solid waste for pay in the city without having first applied for and received a license to engage in such business. 
(Code 1980, § 12-105(4)) 
Sec. 34-67. - Charges for public collection and disposal. 
Monthly charges for public collection and disposal of solid waste shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 12-107(1)) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); drinking in public, § 6-1; building, ch. 14; environment, ch. 18; obstruction of streets, § 26-5; parks and recreation, ch. 30; traffic, ch. 46; maximum speed limits on specific streets, § 46-32; utilities, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the director of public works, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this Code and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(1)) 
Sec. 38-2. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such sidewalks in good repair at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(2)) 
Sec. 38-3. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession of the property. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(3)) 
Sec. 38-4. - Defacing sidewalks, streets and curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs on such places, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while such places are guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(4)) 
Sec. 38-5. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinances and laws of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(5)) 
Sec. 38-6. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(6)) 
Sec. 38-7. - Report of defects, obstructions, deposits and discharges. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city to report the condition to the director of public works as soon as possible. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(7)) 
Sec. 38-8. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale, or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(8)) 
Sec. 38-9. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way without having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(9)) 
Sec. 38-10. - Openings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(10)) 
Sec. 38-11. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree, pole or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. 
(1)  Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises. 
(2)  Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
(3)  The director of public works may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the director of public works, so that no injury shall befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(11)) 
Sec. 38-12. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, ditches, or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 22-101(12)) 
Secs. 38-13—38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 38-51. - Council resolution. 
Whenever the improvement of any street or part of a street shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of the resolution file with the city clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1. 
(Code 1980, § 22-102(1)) 
Sec. 38-52. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public way, or to repair such place, without having first obtained a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-102(2)) 
Sec. 38-53. - Bond. 
Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount of $500.00 with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by or resulting from the work undertaken. 
(Code 1980, § 22-102(3)) 
Sec. 38-54. - Specifications. 
(a)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving access on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(Code 1980, § 22-102(4)) 
Sec. 38-55. - Barricades. 
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1980, § 22-102(5)) 
Secs. 38-56—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 38-81. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(1)) 
Sec. 38-82. - Excavation permit fee. 
The excavation permit fee to be collected by the city clerk shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(2)) 
Sec. 38-83. - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city clerk in the amount of $5,000.00. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; and 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee either in not properly guarding the excavation or for any other injury resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore and place in a good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after the work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before the work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within the two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee; except that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(3)) 
Sec. 38-84. - City's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the director of public works, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost of such work and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was in prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(4)) 
Sec. 38-85. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit under this article, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(5)) 
Sec. 38-86. - Noise, dust and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable; noise, dust and unsightly debris and during the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the mayor or in case of an emergency as provided in this article, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(6)) 
Cross reference— Noise control, § 18-81 et seq. 
Sec. 38-87. - Inspections. 
The director of public works shall make inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 22-103(7)) 
Secs. 38-88—38-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS 

Sec. 38-111. - Permit required. 
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any driveway, curb or curb cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 22-104(1)) 
Sec. 38-112. - Fee. 
The permit fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 22-104(2)) 
Sec. 38-113. - Bond. 
The director of public works shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit under this article to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(Code 1980, § 22-104(3)) 
Secs. 38-114—38-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions or assemblages on the highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 38-152—38-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 38-171. - Required. 
Any person who wishes to organize, form or conduct a parade shall be required to register such parade with the chief of police at least 72 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit from the mayor. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(1)) 
Sec. 38-172. - Application. 
Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the chief of police in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)  The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)  The number of vehicles (if any) and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(3)) 
Sec. 38-173. - Review of application. 
The chief of police shall forward the application to the mayor, who shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: 
(1)  The extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; 
(2)  The availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and 
(3)  Whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(4)) 
Sec. 38-174. - Disposition. 
If the mayor determines in view of all the circumstances that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if he determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he shall grant the parade permit. In either case, the mayor shall indicate his disposition on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(5)) 
Sec. 38-175. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall be inapplicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Code 1980, § 32-210(6)) 
Chapter 42 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Public utility franchise tax. 
(a)  The Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall pay to the city within 60 days following the end of each quarterly period beginning with the quarterly period which shall begin on April 1, 1975, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedule (as prescribed by the Georgia Public Service Commission), within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding quarterly period, on condition that if the city shall grant to any other corporation the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those contained in this section, including the payment of a license, privilege or occupation tax in an amount at least equal to that specified in this section. 
(b)  The payment of the percentage of gross sales shall be in lieu of all occupation, license, excise and special franchise taxes, and in full of all money demands and charges, except ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances; and whatever amount, if any, shall at any time be required or exacted for the benefit of the city on any of such accounts or on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage. 
(Code 1980, § 4-107(2)) 
Sec. 42-2. - Alcoholic beverage excise tax; rate of levy. 
There is set and levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax in the sum of $0.80 per wine gallon and in similar proportion for bottles and containers of various sizes. 
(Code 1980, § 4-103(1)) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Secs. 42-3—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term "gross receipts" for each such depository financial institution in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-42. - Tax levied. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank, each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the city, not exempted by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or $1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater. 
(b)  The taxes levied by subsection (a) of this section for each year shall be levied on the amount of gross receipts received by each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
Sec. 42-43. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the city not later than March 1 of each year a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
Sec. 42-44. - When taxes due and payable. 
The taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable on April 1 of each year. 
Secs. 42-45—42-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 

Sec. 42-71. - License required. 
Each person doing an insurance business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 32-204(1)) 
Sec. 42-72. - License fee; license fee for additional locations generally. 
There is levied an annual license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges upon every insurance company engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city, and there is levied an additional annual license fee in such amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by any such company within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(2); Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 1; Ord. of 9-28-1993) 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 42-73. - License fee for businesses lending money or offering term financing of sales; taking insurance applications. 
There is levied an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under section 42-72, which company is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurance company for insurance. 
(Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 2) 
State Law reference— Local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 42-74. - License fee for additional locations of independent agencies and brokers. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 42-72 or section 42-73, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 3) 
Sec. 42-75. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 42-72 and 42-73. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(1); Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 4) 
Sec. 42-76. - Gross direct premiums tax on classes of insurance other than life, accident and sickness. 
There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1) doing business as provided in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2 in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The expression "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(2); Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 5) 
Sec. 42-77. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable February 1 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(3); Ord. of 12-1-1983, § 6) 
Sec. 42-78. - False information. 
It is declared to be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report required to be filed under this article. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(4)) 
Sec. 42-79. - Confidentiality of information. 
All reports required to be filed under this article shall be confidential, and the information contained in such reports shall be used solely by the officers of the city responsible for the administration of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(5)) 
Sec. 42-80. - Enforcement. 
The taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this city. 
(Code 1980, § 4-104(6)) 
Secs. 42-81—42-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MALT BEVERAGE EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Imposition of excise tax on malt beverages required, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80. 

Sec. 42-111. - Rate of levy. 
There is set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the city an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes. 
(Code 1980, § 4-102(1)) 
Sec. 42-112. - Against whom levied. 
The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 4-102(2)) 
Sec. 42-113. - Due date and required report. 
The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(Code 1980, § 4-102(3)) 
Sec. 42-114. - Enforcement. 
The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city; and in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Code 1980, § 4-102(4)) 
Secs. 42-115—42-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OCCUPATION TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-151. - Required; required for business dealing with the city. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation, which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the tax collecting official or his deputies or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(Code 1980, § 19-36) 
Sec. 42-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupational tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple-line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, but without limitation to, the following: 
(1)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
(4)  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(1)  Sales, use or excise tax; 
(2)  Sales returns, allowances and discounts; 
(3)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
(4)  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; or 
(5)  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location of office does not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1980, § 19-37) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-153. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(Code 1980, § 19-38) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 42-154. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county or within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule shall be as follows: 

 
(c)  (1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the city require that a business will pay occupational tax for more than 100 percent of the gross receipts. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states. 
(3)  The city shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 19-39) 
Sec. 42-155. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
The assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 19-40) 
Sec. 42-156. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the line of business the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk and that line of business being noted by the city clerk's office upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1980, § 19-41) 
Sec. 42-157. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of an occupation tax. 
(Code 1980, § 19-42) 
Sec. 42-158. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by December 1 of each year. 
(Code 1980, § 19-43) 
Sec. 42-159. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1980, § 19-44) 
Sec. 42-160. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied under this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax that only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 19-45) 
Sec. 42-161. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each occupation tax shall be for the calender year 1995 and succeeding calender years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided, Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 42-166. On any new profession, trade or calling in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration shall be issued by the city clerk; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the city clerk may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1980, § 19-46) 
Sec. 42-162. - Exemption on grounds that operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 100 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 19-47) 
Sec. 42-163. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1980, § 19-48) 
Sec. 42-164. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Code 1980, § 19-49) 
Sec. 42-165. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 19-50) 
Sec. 42-166. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each registration required in this article shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is imposed on March 2 of each year a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before March 1 of each year. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 42-167. These penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration shall be issued by the city clerk; and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 19-51) 
Sec. 42-167. - Penalty for article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall upon conviction before the city or county judge be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1980, § 19-52) 
Sec. 42-168. - City clerk; subpoena and arresting powers. 
The city clerk shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1980, § 19-53) 
Sec. 42-169. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1980, § 19-54) 
Sec. 42-170. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1980, § 19-55) 
Sec. 42-171. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and each different line of business will have the number of employees of that line of business identified on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 19-56) 
Sec. 42-172. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax levied in this article, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state or of the United States and other local governments. 
(Code 1980, § 19-57) 
Sec. 42-173. - Inspections of books and records. 
The city clerk, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns required in this article are made. The revenue collection officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city; and upon demand of the city clerk, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at his discretion. If after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient or $100.00 will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Code 1980, § 19-58) 
Sec. 42-174. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part of the tax before it becomes delinquent or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in this article, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 42-176. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1980, § 19-59) 
Sec. 42-175. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any person who does business in the city after registration for the business has been revoked shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1980, § 19-60) 
Sec. 42-176. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent; and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment of such tax becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police upon the property of the defendant located in the city; and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of execution, with interest and costs. All other related proceedings shall be had as is provided by ordinances and the Charter of the city and the laws of the state; and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 19-61) 
Sec. 42-177. - Amendment, repeal of article. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time; and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. This amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change its classification. The payment of any occupation tax shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Code 1980, § 19-62) 
Sec. 42-178. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts or ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1980, § 19-63) 
Sec. 42-179. - Enforcement of provision. 
It is made the duty of the city clerk and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. It is made the further duty of the chief of police and members of the police department, and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted under the registration. 
(Code 1980, § 19-64) 
Sec. 42-180. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1980, § 19-65) 
Sec. 42-181. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
The mayor and council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 19-66) 
Sec. 42-182. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development for attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Code 1980, § 19-67) 
Sec. 42-183. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1980, § 19-68) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noise control on defect in vehicle or load, § 18-96; law enforcement, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a); power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Adoption of uniform rules of the road. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 11-101; Ord. of 9-1-1983) 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
Sec. 46-2. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to violate any provision of this Code or state law regarding the operation of vehicles. 
Sec. 46-3. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts; and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable as for other violations of this Code. 
Secs. 46-4—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-31. - General speed limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street or portion of a street in the city at a rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour unless another speed limit is posted or otherwise designated for such street or portion of a street. 
Sec. 46-32. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The city council may alter the maximum speed limits established by section 46-31 on any street or portion of a street within the city in accord with the provisions of state law. Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street or portion of a street, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such limit. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
Sec. 46-33. - Traffic, speed zones; signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the city council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians. 
(3)  Traffic lanes. 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones. 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices. 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic control devices. The map and any amendments or changes to the map shall be adopted by the city council, and the map shall be known as the official traffic control map of the city. An official copy of the map shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this article shall be a violation of this Code. 
Sec. 46-34. - Speed detection devices. 
(a)  The city is authorized to use speed detection devices for the purpose of traffic control on the roads and streets in the city. 
(b)  Such speed detection devices shall be used only for the purpose of public safety and traffic control, and shall not be used for the purpose of raising revenue. 
Sec. 46-35. - Covering of loads. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
Sec. 46-36. - Parking in deceleration or acceleration lanes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile, truck, bus, truck tractor, trailer, tractor, trailer combination, motorcycle, moped or other motor vehicle within or upon the deceleration or acceleration lanes lying in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(b)  Deceleration and acceleration lanes shall be defined for the purpose of this section as those strips of pavement lying adjacent to and to the east of the northbound lanes of traffic and adjacent to and to the west of the southbound lanes of traffic which are not part of the regular roadway but afford access into and out of the driveways and side roads along the highway. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be a violation of a city ordinance and shall be prosecuted in the municipal court. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 46-37. - Speed control devices. 
(a)  Speed control devices known as speed control bumps, inclines, speed control humps or other concrete, asphalt, or other substances placed in the streets of the city to regulate but not impede traffic are designated official traffic control devices as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(2). 
(b)  The chief of police or other designated traffic safety official may, with the consent of the mayor and council given in a properly called or regular meeting, place such speed control devices in such locations as may be necessary to regulate the flow and speed of traffic in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-19-1996, § 11-102) 
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; building, ch. 14; construction code for public utilities, § 14-36; construction codes for water supply and sewer disposal facilities, § 14-37; environment, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Rates and charges. 
The fees, rates and charges for water and sewer services furnished by the city to consumers shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, §§ 20-101—20-103) 
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 50-31. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 50-1, will be made for a five-eighths-inch by three-fourths-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution line as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 20-104) 
Sec. 50-32. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Consumers wishing to apply for water and sewer service shall make application at city hall. 
(1)  Where the meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the city covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1980, § 20-105) 
Sec. 50-33. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1980, § 20-106) 
Sec. 50-34. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service before occupying the premises. No service shall be restored to the premises until all delinquent accounts are paid in full, and a service charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk is paid. 
(Code 1980, § 20-107) 
Sec. 50-35. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 30 days from the date due will result in the water's being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 45 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement; and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive nor the city obligated to supply any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Water and sewer service shall not be reconnected until the customer's delinquent bill, including penalty and disconnection charges, have been paid in full. Should such customer thereafter desire to be reconnected to the water and sewer system, a reconnection charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be collected. Bills shall be paid at the city hall, and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from their payment. 
(Code 1980, § 20-108) 
Sec. 50-36. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(b)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; or 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1980, § 20-109) 
Sec. 50-37. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer may pay such bill under protest, and payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk; however, if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1980, § 20-110) 
Secs. 50-38—50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer, overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen ion concentration of 10 ;minus;7 . 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater." 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity or flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer ) means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of wastewater facilities and/or of wastewater treatment works and/or of water pollution control of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant" or "sewage treatment plant." 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel from the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1980, § 21-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-62. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the town and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the town is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Code 1980, § 21-102) 
Sec. 50-63. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 50-63(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of the notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  The type capacities, location and layout of all private wastewater disposal systems shall comply with the state department of human resources if the system is a septic tank or cesspool or the state department of natural resources if the system is a wastewater treatment plant. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as the public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direction connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article; and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1980, § 21-103) 
Sec. 50-64. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit or for an industrial building sewer permit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification of such provisions, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard, streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 21-104) 
Sec. 50-65. - Regulation of discharge into the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, or any lubricating oils or greases. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the wastewater facilities and/or personnel of the wastewater facilities. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as but not limited to ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb or public property, or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations of this section if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet these objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 21 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 25 mg/l of floatable oils, fats or greases. (See section 50-61 and subsection (f) of this section.) 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see section 50-61). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, school cafeterias, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities or concentrations or both which constitute a slug. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plan effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing a BOD 5 greater than 220 mg/l. See section 50-61. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing more than 220 mg/l of suspended solids. 
(13)  Any wastewater containing a pH lower than 5.5 or in excess of 9.5. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptance condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this article. 
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection (d)(3), or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. All existing interceptors shall be subject to, and maintained in accordance with this section and/or ordinance. 
(g)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. All industrial users are to meet pretreatment requirements as set forth in 40 CFR 128. 
(h)  When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurements of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," 20th edition, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(j)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Code 1980, § 21-105) 
Sec. 50-66. - Penalties. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 21-106) 
Sec. 50-67. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(c)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees; and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 50-65(h). 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of but not limited to inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are authorized and empowered to serve written notice to any and all violators of this article. A reasonable time shall be allowed for correction of the violation. Violators disregarding the reasonable time shall be subject to section 1-11 and disconnection of service for each day that the violation continues beyond the reasonable time allowed. Violators of this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 21-107) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted by the mayor and city council on April ????,2000. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform; and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); school or church location from alcoholic beverages, § 6-71; location of alcoholic beverage business, distance from residence, § 6-72; building, ch. 14. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE 
An ordinance of the City of Woodbury, Georgia, regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the use of buildings and land for business, industry, residence, public activities and other purposes; and for dividing the incorporated area into districts for such purposes and establishing boundaries; providing for a planning commission, defining its power and duties; the method of administration, amendment and enforcement; prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions; and repealing conflicting resolutions. 
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE 

Sec. 2.1. - [Generally.] 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of land and improvements in the City of Woodbury, Georgia. The zoning regulations and districts herein established are designed to: 
Lessen congestion in the streets; 
Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
Promote health, and general welfare; 
Provide adequate light and air; 
Avoid undue concentration of the population; 
Provision of [provide] transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
Conserve the value of economy; 
Encourage the most appropriate use of land and structures; 
Promote quality of life for all citizens; [and] 
Provide consistency with land use element of the comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 2.2. - [Minimum Standards.] 
The requirements of these regulations are minimum permissible standards; and it is expected that developers and the respective decision-making authority will normally strive for quality developments which will exceed these minimum requirements. 
Sec. 2.3. - [Comprehensive Plan.] 
By this section, the comprehensive plan adopted by resolution of the city council of the City of Woodbury is established as the official policy of the city concerning land uses. The incorporated areas of the city are divided into land use categories consistent with the future land use plan in the land use element of the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan does not alter or affect the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be updated on an as needed basis to reflect changes in land use and to discover any inconsistencies zoning changes have caused in the future land use map. 
Sec. 2.4. - [Updating Land Use Element.] 
The land use element of the comprehensive plan shall be updated as needed or as required by law. This update shall be used to identify current uses of land, emerging growth patterns and any significant change in land use policy as identified by the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. This update shall also be used as policy in the city's consideration of proposed amendments to the zoning map or text of the zoning ordinance. All amendments to the City of Woodbury's comprehensive plan shall be in accordance with the minimum planning standards and procedures of the Georgia Planning Act. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this resolution, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" includes the [word] "structure," the word "may" is permissive and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
1.  Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way, alley or easement. 
2.  Accessory Building. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main buildings. Accessory buildings are not considered to be the primary building on the site. 
3.  Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
4.  Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
5.  Alteration of Building. Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls or partitions, beams, columns, girders) except such changes as may be required for its safety; an addition to or reduction of a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or a building from one location to another; or any change in the roof or the exterior walls. 
6.  Apartment. See "Dwelling, Multifamily." 
7.  Apartment, Efficiency. A dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities. 
8.  Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
9.  Basement. The area below the first floor level in a building, having not more than one-half of its height above grade. 
10.  Bed and Breakfast Facilities. A residential bed and breakfast is a structure occupied by its owner of record, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only are provided to guests for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator and said operator shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast is in operation. 
11.  Buffer Area or Buffer Strip. 
Berm. A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound. The mound is usually two to eight feet high and is used to shield, screen and buffer undesirable views and to separate incompatible land uses. 
Screen. A landscaped open area unoccupied by structures and facilities except as permitted by this ordinance and/or in some instances as specified, a screen of shrubs, trees or similar plants at least eight feet in height and dense enough to establish interrupted vision from one side to the other may be required. Both are established to separate different and possibly incompatible types of land use. 
River Corridor or Floodplain. Area along the course of any river corridor or floodplain to be maintained in a vegetative, undisturbed and natural condition. 
12.  Boardinghouse. A building other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement, meals and/or lodging are provided for three or more guests, but not exceeding 20 persons in a residential zone. 
13.  Building. Any roofed structure designed, built or intended for shelter, support, housing, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
14.  Building Height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building excluding chimneys or steeples. 
15.  Building Line. The line, parallel to the street right-of-way line, which represents distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or street centerline, equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
16.  Building, Principal. A building or structure where the use of the building or structure is consistent with the use permitted in the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. In any residential zoning district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building of the lot or parcel. 
17.  Certificate of Occupancy. Issued by the building inspector certifying that the structure complies with the Southern [sic] Standard Building Code, all building inspection requirements and all sections of this Ordinance including but not limited to section 5-3 and section 18.13—18.15. 
18.  Child Care Center. Agencies, organizations or individuals which render service on a regular basis, with or without remuneration, in the form of providing day time care, boarding, feeding, supervising, or tutoring to children who are not members of the family, foster children, or legal wards of the attendant, including day nurseries, kindergartens, nursery schools, and similar services. This definition does not include tax-supported public schools. 
Home Child Care. Limited to six or less children and shall be registered with the State of Georgia. Child care homes shall be considered a home occupation and shall be in accordance with those regulations. Child care homes, however, shall be exempt from the 25 percent floor space requirement set forth in article 8. Also, child care homes are required to have a fenced yard of sufficient area and height to accommodate the maximum of six children regardless of the number of children enrolled in the program. 
Group Child Care. The number of children allowed in group child care is seven to 19. This child care group is required to be licensed by the State of Georgia and is not considered a home occupation. These child care structures shall be located in limited or general commercial zoned districts. 
Child Care Facility. The number of children allowed in a child care facility is 19 or more. This facility shall be licensed by the State of Georgia and located in general commercial zoned districts. 
19.  Church. A building, structure or group of buildings in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
20.  Clinic. A facility where medical and dental patients, who are not normally lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or a group of physicians practicing activities invasive to the human body either by penetrating the skin or through any orifice or through the use of colonics. 
21.  Club or Lodge. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or other legally established group of persons for social, fraternal, civic, cultural, literary, political, educational or recreational purposes on a nonprofit basis operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
22.  Common Driveway. A driveway used by more than one dwelling or structure and at least 12 feet in width where any common use occurs. Common use occurs on those portions of a driveway which must be traveled by users of two dwellings or structures for ingress and egress. 
23.  Comprehensive Land Use Plan. A comprehensive, long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, community facilities, and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements. 
24.  Conditional Zoning. The imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks, operation times and other nonuse requirements, physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. 
25.  Condominium. A building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. 
26.  Convenience Food Store With Self-Service Fuel Sales. Any retail establishment offering for sale automotive fuels, prepackaged food products, beverages, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same. Further there shall be no automotive repairs done on site. 
27.  Day Nursery. See "Child Care Center." 
28.  Deck. A roofless accessory attached or detached platform without exterior walls generally constructed of wood, which adjoins a residence. Rails or safety features shall not be deemed to be exterior walls. 
29.  Deed Restrictions/Private Covenants. Private stipulations, usually pertaining to residential subdivisions which govern lot size, minimum floor area, uses permitted and in some instances architectural design. These may be stricter [than] or not as strict as provisions included in the zoning. In cases where private deed restrictions or covenants are not as strict as zoning regulations the zoning regulations shall be the governing standard. 
30.  Density. The overall intensity of land use for the total project. When referring to residential area, density is defined as the number of housing units permitted per acre in the respective zoning district involved in accordance with the terms of this zoning ordinance or as authorized under the development standards of this ordinance. Unless otherwise stated, density figures are to be in terms of net acres, or the land devoted to residential use exclusive of streets or other public lands. 
31.  Developments of Regional Impact (DRI). Public or private development which because of its location, scale, land use type or public service demand or any combination could affect the growth, development and quality of life of the region. (Allow 30 days to process through regional development center.) 
32.  Developer. Any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property and engages in building, alteration of land, building, structure. 
33.  District. A section of the City of Woodbury within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
34.  Drainage. A general term applied to the storage or conveyance of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping. 
35.  Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to the consumer while consumer remains inside a vehicle. 
36.  Duplex. A residential structure designed for two-family occupancy with each family in a separate dwelling unit, using separate cooking facilities. 
37.  Dwelling. A building or portion thereof which is designed or used for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings and manufactured housing, but not including hotels, motels, or boarding houses. 
a.  Single-Family Dwelling. Detached dwelling, containing not more than one dwelling unit, designed or occupied exclusively by a single family. 
b.  Multifamily, Dwelling. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for three or more adjoining dwelling units, occupied by three or more families living independently of one another, with each dwelling unit having a party wall and/or party floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. This includes apartments, condominiums, or any other type of multifamily structure. 
c.  Two-Family Dwelling. A building designed, constructed, altered, or used for two adjoining dwelling units, joined by common wall or common floor and occupied by two families living independently of each other, using two cooking facilities. Includes "duplex." 
38.  Dwelling Unit. A building or portion thereof providing complete living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit, using one cooking facility, excluding hotels, motels or boardinghouses. 
39.  Easement. A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his land for right-of-way, limited or specified purposes. 
40.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land disturbing activity. 
41.  Existing Grade. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
42.  Fabricating. The process of assembling, using standardized parts. 
43.  Family. An individual or two or more persons, occupying a single dwelling unit, related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not more than three persons not related by blood or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit and using one common cooking facility. The term "family" does not include any organizational or institutional groups such as those occupying a lodginghouse, hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house, etc. 
44.  Floor Area. Total number of heated square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls of the several floors of a structure. Also, the gross leasable floor area for any business or industry based on interior dimensions. 
45.  Floor Area Ratio. The gross floor area of a building or structure on a lot divided by the total lot area. Floor does not include area within parking structures. 

 
46.  Frontage. The side of a lot abutting on a street. 
47.  Garage, Mechanical/Repair. Buildings and premises designed or used for the purpose of providing the services of maintenance, minor repair, washing, adjusting, equipping and/or major commercial repair of motor vehicles provided that the body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises. A mechanical garage which provides for the storage of vehicles for the purpose of salvaging parts for sale or repair shall be classified as a junkyard. 
48.  Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a principal building owned or operated by the occupants of the primary building, used only for private storage of permitted motor vehicles. 
49.  Hardship. A condition which shall be considered to exist only when one or more of the following apply to a particular piece of property and such condition has not been created by the applicant's own acts. 
a.  The owner cannot comply with the provisions of this ordinance without violating some other resolution or section of this ordinance. 
b.  The topography of the land or shape of a particular lot precludes a conforming use. 
50.  Heavy Manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments, other than those classified as light manufacturing, including those involving the conversion of raw materials into usable finished products, provided that manufacturing that will generate liquid waste from the manufacturing process or air pollutants shall comply with antipollution standards established by the state and county. 
51.  Home Occupation. An occupation or profession for gain or support conducted entirely within a single-family dwelling and which is carried on solely by a member or members of the family residing on the premises and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The occupation/business may require access by the public. 
52.  Hospital. An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions. Also, including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences. All hospitals shall be authorized by Georgia law. 
53.  Hotel. A building in which overnight accommodations are provided for ten or more individuals of the general public for compensation and in which provisions for cooking are made in a central kitchen and not in the individual rooms or suites and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. 
54.  Industrial Park. A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a park-like setting for industrial establishments. 
55.  Industrialized Building. A term used only in Georgia, "industrialized building" replaces the now obsolete term "factory-built housing," and describes certain manufactured housing which is regulated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. Georgia law defines industrialized building as "any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof." Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Buildings Act," Georgia Law 1982 (O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, article 2, part 1). An industrialized building must meet all requirements of the district in which it is located. This term includes "modular homes." 
56.  Infill. The development of new housing or other buildings on scattered vacant sites in a built-up area. 
57.  Institution. Premises occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for public use. 
58.  Intermediate Regional Flood (IRF). A 100-year frequency flood, as defined on flood hazard maps, which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
59.  Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris including but not limited to junk vehicle, junk vehicle parts, discarded appliances, and other mechanicals, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. 
60.  Junk Vehicles. Any vehicle that cannot be moved by its own power or does not have an updated license plate. 
61.  Junkyard. A lot or parcel, whether enclosed or not, used for the collection, storage, keeping, sale, abandonment, or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvage house wrecking, and structural steel material and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of three or more junk vehicles, or other machinery, appliances or parts of appliances. 
Storage Area. Property and/or buildings used for the permanent or temporary storage of inoperable vehicles, machinery or other equipment or materials awaiting salvage, restoration, or sale, but not including exterior displays of new or used merchandise in operable condition for retail or wholesale distribution, when fenced and provided it is not a junkyard. 
62.  Kennels. Facility for the boarding (overnight) of domestic animals, limited to five or more dogs and cats four months of age or older. Breeding and training of dogs and cats and the sale to the public of puppies and kittens is classified as a kennel activity. 
63.  Land Use Plan. A professionally prepared and formally adopted document and map depicting the desirable future location of residential, commercial, public, and industrial land uses and thoroughfares. 
64.  Land Area per Dwelling Unit. The amount of land in square feet required for each dwelling unit permitted on a zoning lot. 
65.  Landscaping. The addition of lawns, trees, plants, shrubs or other natural and/or decorative features to land. 
66.  Light Industry. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
67.  Light Manufacturing. An establishment for production, processing, assembly, manufacturing, compounding, preparation, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods or products; however, the manufacturing and production of any product which emits noxious noise, odor or fumes, bulk storage of flammable materials for resale, and other heavy manufacturing uses listed in the permitted use table 6.3, shall not be permitted. 
68.  Lot. An unsubdivided parcel or portion of land varying in size, described as a single unit of property and held in single ownership by one person or in common ownership by more than one person. This land is or intended to be occupied by a particular use or occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a particular use or interest; together with the customary accessory buildings and uses and open spaces belonging to same. This land has both lot area and lot dimensions equal to or greater than the lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance for the zoning district in which such tract of land is located and for the uses proposed for the tract of land, having its principal frontage upon a city street, thoroughfare, state highway or a dedicated easement for ingress and egress on record in the office of the clerk of superior court. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" [or] "parcel" and shall mean the same as "zoning lot"; however, the term "lot" shall not be construed to mean "land lot." 
69.  Lot, Corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. 
70.  Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
71.  Lot Line. 
Adjacent. A lot or parcel of land sharing all or part of a common lot line with another parcel or lot. 
Front. The front line of an interior lot separating the lot from the frontage street right-of-way; across which the primary access to the property passes and which shall be used to identify the street address of the property in question. The front lot line of a corner lot shall be the lot line upon which the principal building entrance will front. 
Rear. The lot line generally opposite the lot line along the frontage of the lot and intersects the side lot lines. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front line not less than ten feet long lying wholly within the lot farthest from the front lot line. 
Side. Any property line not designated as front or rear. 
72.  Lot of Record. An area designated as a separate and distinct lot or parcel of land which has been lawfully recorded by subdivision plat or deed on the public records of Meriwether County Georgia, on or before the date of adoption of the original zoning ordinance. 
73.  Manufactured Home. A new or used structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
74.  Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing units are defined as single-family dwellings if all requirements, as set forth in article 6.2, Appearances Standards, of this ordinance are met. 
75.  Manufactured Home Community (Mobile Home Park). A lot, or parcel of land or place where three or more manufactured homes are parked for residential purposes, or where space is set aside and offered for rent for manufactured homes. Lots consist of appropriate and adequate community services, recreational facilities, utilities, streets and sidewalks provided by the developer. 
76.  Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and built prior to June 15, 1976. 
77.  Modular Home or Building. A factory-fabricated single-family dwelling which is constructed in one or more sections and is manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act and the rules of the commissioner of community affairs. Each modular home must meet the standards of an industrialized building of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and must bear the seal of approval as issued by the Georgia Commissioner of Community Affairs. 
78.  Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms, offered to the general public for compensation, having separate entrances for each room or suite of rooms, and for which automobile parking is provided for each room or suite of rooms. To be used primarily for automobile transients and including such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge." 
79.  Mini-Warehouse. A building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any commercial use. 
80.  Nonconforming Use. Any building, structure, or land use which lawfully exists at the time of adoption of [this] zoning ordinance or subsequently amended thereto and which does not conform, after the passage of such ordinance and/or amendments, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
81.  Official Zoning Map. A map officially adopted by the governing body of a political jurisdiction which illustrates the various zoning districts of the jurisdiction. 
82.  Open Space. That required portion of a lot at ground level, unoccupied by enclosed buildings and available to all occupants of the project. This space shall not be devoted to driveways, setbacks or off-street parking, but shall be usable for green space, recreational use and other leisure activities normally carried on outdoors. 
83.  Owner. The person in whom is vested the fee simple title or record, or a vendee under contract or purchase agreement. If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited); if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least ten percent of the outstanding shares; and any agent of the owner, including a developer. The term "owner" may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of property. 
84.  Overlay. A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements beyond those required by the underlying zone. 
85.  Parcel. See "Lot." 
86.  Person. Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, or corporation, or any other legal entity capable of ownership. 
87.  Personal Care Home. A residence providing the protective care of residents who do not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility for safety of the resident while inside the building and may include daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness for intervention in the event of a resident experiencing a crisis, supervision in the areas of nutrition and medication, and the actual provision of transient medical care. 
1.  Personal Care Home, Congregate. Means a home for adults which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
2.  Personal Care Home, Family. A home for adults in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character and appearance, which offers care to two through six persons. 
3.  Personal Care Home, Group. Means a home for adult persons in a residence or other type building, noninstitutional in character and appearance, which offers care to seven through 16 persons. 
89.  Planned Development. An area to be planned and developed as single entity, according to applicable standards and regulations and containing one or more structures as a single project. Planned developments may consist primarily of either commercial, industrial, residential or with incidental accessory activities, or they may contain some combination of those primary uses. 
90.  Planning Commission. The City of Woodbury Planning and Zoning Commission. 
91.  Plat, Final. A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording of that subdivision in accordance with the plat laws of the State of Georgia. 
92.  Plat, Preliminary. A tentative subdivision plat, indicating approximate proposed layout of a subdivision submitted with supporting documentation as necessary for consideration and approval prior to preparation of the final plat. 
93.  Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by any county, city or other public agency. 
94.  Professional Office. Structure wherein services derived from the practice of recognized profession, such as predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations including but not limited to attorneys, medical, optical, audiology, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stockbroker, architect, engineer, manufacture representative, professional counseling, dental, investigative services, photography, insurance, contractor, land surveyor, telephone sales, political campaign, veterinary medicine, travel bureaus. 
95.  Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle or portable structure transportable on a mobile chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling. It includes travel trailers, motorized dwellings, popup campers, pickup campers, coaches, and other similar recreational equipment. 
96.  Remodeling. To construct an addition or alter the design or layout of a building or make substantial repairs or alterations so that a change or modification of the entrance facilities, toilet facilities, or vertical access facilities is achieved. 
97.  Restaurant. An establishment where food is sold for consumption on the premises. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or nonprofit community swimming pool, playground, or park operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed a restaurant. 
98.  Secondary Detached Residence. A subordinate building on the same lot with the main building which is used, designed, or intended for dwelling purposes, such as guest houses and employee quarters, including tenant dwellings, but not including any dwelling which is rented, leased, or occupied by anyone other than the occupant of the main building or his guests, immediate family, or employees. 
99.  Salvage Operation/Salvage Yard. For the purpose of this ordinance a "salvage operation" or "salvage yard" is a business the principal activity of which is buying, selling, exchanging, storing, sorting, packing, or dismantling of waste, used or secondhand material or three or more inoperable vehicles or parts thereof to consumers for personal use with only incidental residual transfer on a non-retail basis. A commercial recycling operation or junkyard as defined in this section, are engaged in salvage operations. 
100.  School. A facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playgrounds, stadiums, or other structures and grounds used in conjunction therewith. This shall include but not be limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary, or post-secondary education. 
101.  Service Station. Any building or land used primarily for the dispensing, servicing, or offering for sale at retail any automobile fuels, oils, grease, batteries, tires, or general automotive accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automobile repairs, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
102.  Setback. A required open space on a lot or parcel of land upon which structures are to be separated from the boundary line of the lot on which they are located is erected except as permitted by this ordinance and is the shortest distance measured by a perpendicular line from the lot line or centerline of a street, highway or road and the nearest load bearing wall of the principal building or structure on a lot, load bearing walls do not include cornices, steps, open terraces, open entrance hoods, and other similar appurtenances which do not project more than six feet from the building. This area is bounded by property lines and setback lines as appropriate. 
Setback Line, Rear. The interior boundary of the rear setback area (or rear yard) being a line equidistant from the rear property line and extending from the side property lines at the minimum depth specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
Setback Line, Side. The interior boundary of a side setback area (or side yard), being a line equidistant from the appropriate side property lines and extending from the front setback line to the rear setback line at a minimum depth as specified by the appropriate zoning district requirements. 
Setback Line. The minimum required distance from the street right-of-way line or any other property line that the principal building must observe. 
Setback Line, Front. An open yard area extending between the side lot lines across the front of a lot. The depth of which is the required minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot. Also see "Front Yard." 
103.  Sewage (individual disposal system). A septic tank disposal system or any other sewage treatment device for one lot as approved by the county health department. 
104.  Sewage (central system). A community sewage system including collection and treatment facilities serving more than one lot in a subdivision, approved by Meriwether County Health Department. 
105.  Shopping Center. Two or more commercial establishments planned and managed as a single architecturally unified unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
106.  Sign. Any attached or freestanding outdoor advertising display of any surface, fabric or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter, for the purpose of conveying 
b.  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
c.  Any division for agricultural purposes. 
123.  Temporary Uses. A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
124.  Trailer, Travel. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper" or "travel" trailer. 
125.  Travel Trailer Park. See "Recreational Vehicle Park." 
126.  Truck Terminal. A building and premises catering primarily to trucks which may include warehousing facilities, and may include the functions and services of a mechanical garage, but shall not include the storage of trucks or other vehicles for the purpose of using parts for sale or repair. 
127.  Undisturbed Natural Buffer (Greenbelt). A tract of land dedicated to the city in its natural undisturbed state where no vegetation can be removed or planted without a permit. No herbicides, pesticides, or other chemicals, either natural or manmade can be used in this buffer. 
128.  Use, Special. Uses that are permitted in a particular zoning district, but only under certain specified conditions. See "Special Exception." 
129.  Use, Permitted. Those uses specifically listed in this ordinance as "uses permitted inherently" not to include uses herein defined as "nonconforming uses." 
130.  Use, Principal. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
131.  Variance. A deviation from of the strict terms of the zoning regulations granted by the city where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought and not as a result of any intentional action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted which shall authorize a land use or lot size not otherwise permitted in a particular district. 
132.  Water System, Individual. A potable water system other than a public water system serving a single building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
133.  Water System, Public. A potable water supply system other than individual water systems owned by the City of Woodbury. 
134.  Yard Sale. A one- to two-day sale of common household items from a residential lot or lots. Also garage sale, carport sale, rummage sale. 
135.  Yard. A space on the same lot with the principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except for porches, steps and walkways and accessory building are expressly permitted. Yards shall be delineated by the "setback" and "setback line" definitions. 
Front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way line and the principal building (or front setback line) of the lot and extending across the front of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. 
Rear. That area of a lot extending across the rear of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building (or rear setback line) on the lot and on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Side. That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building (or side setback line) on the lot extending from the front yard or front setback line (or front lot line where no front yard/setback line is required) to the rear yard or rear setback line (or rear lot line where no rear yard/setback line is required). 
136.  Zoning Map. The legally adopted "Zoning Districts Map of the City of Woodbury, Georgia." 
137.  Zoning. The delineation of districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4.1. - Use of Land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 4.2. - Use of Buildings. 
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, structurally altered or used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building or structure is located. 
4.2-1. Location of Buildings. Every building hereafter erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered shall be located on lots as herein defined except as approved by the planning commission in the form of a variance. 
4.2-2. Height of Buildings. No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which it is located except for the following: 
Chimneys 
Church spires 
Fire Towers 
Flag Poles 
Public Monuments 
Tanks 
Water Towers 
Silos 
Public and semipublic service buildings, hospitals, institutions and schools, may be erected to a height not to exceed 100 feet; churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet, provided the required side yard and rear yards shall be increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is located. 
4.2-3. Dimensional Regulations. No building or use shall be erected, converted, enlarged, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the minimum space requirements (i.e. the lot area, floor area, building height, etc.) for the district in which such building is located. 
4.2-4. Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings shall not be permitted in any district except when they are used in conjunction with construction work or pending completion of a permanent building. Such building shall be used for a period not to exceed one year and shall be removed when the construction of the permanent building is completed. Construction of the permanent building is said to be completed at the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 4.3. - Interpretation and Application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of this ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, then the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 4.4. - Zoning Affects All Land and Buildings. 
No buildings, structures or land shall be used or occupied; and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
Sec. 4.5. - Principal Building per Lot. 
Unless provided for elsewhere in this ordinance, there shall be no more than one principal building or structure upon any lot in any residential district. 
Sec. 4.6. - Required Open Space May Not Be Used by Another Building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure. 
Sec. 4.7. - Reduction of Yards or Lot Areas. 
Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
ARTICLE 5. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5.1. - Lots of Record. 
Any lot of record which is legal on the date of the first published notice of this ordinance may be used subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
5.1-1. Use of Substandard Lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption or amendment of this ordinance does not own sufficient area and width to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance may be used as a building site for a structure or use permitted in the zone in which it is located; provided the owner has the approval in writing of the City of Woodbury Planning Commission. 
5.1-2. Residential Use of Substandard Lots. In addition to section 5.1-1, in any residential district, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance which has a width or area less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling only. In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the planning commission is empowered to hear the request for a side yard variance provided there is a ten-foot side yard. If a minimum ten-foot side yard is not possible then a minimum width for single-family dwelling may be requested. 
Sec. 5.2. - Area, Yard and Height Regulations. 
5.2-1. Lot Area. Hereafter, no lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width, size of yards or lot area per family requirement of this ordinance is altered except when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
5.2-2. Yards and Open Space. 
a.  Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may be considered as a portion of the required yard. 
b.  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky so that projections such as sills, window air conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features may not extend into a required yard. 
c.  Other provisions of this ordinance notwithstanding, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street sides of corner lots shall violate the corner visibility provisions of this ordinance. 
5.2-3. Front Yards. 
a.  Where an official line has been established for the future widening or opening of a street or major thoroughfare upon which a lot abuts, the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line to the nearest line of the building. 
b.  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street. 
c.  Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the side adjacent to both streets and the remaining yards shall be considered side yard requirements. 
d.  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, which are not covered by a roof or canopy and do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend or project into the required setback area if it is six feet or less. 
e.  Within the same block and zoning district, when 25 percent or more of the existing buildings have less than the minimum required setback, the required front setback of such lot should not exceed the average of the existing front setbacks. 
5.2-4. Side Yards. 
a.  For the purposes of the side yard regulations, a group of commercial buildings separated by common or party walls shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
b.  The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches and other public or semipublic buildings in residential districts shall be 25 feet. Where a side yard is adjacent to a business or commercial district, then the width of that yard shall be as required for the district in which the building is located. 
5.2-5. Fences and Walls. No fence or freestanding wall in a required yard other than a retaining wall shall be more than eight feet in height. 
Sec. 5.3. - Corner Visibility. 
No sign, fence, wall, hedge, planting or other obstruction to vision, extending to a height in excess of three feet above the established street grade, shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner lot that is included between the lines of the intersecting streets and a straight line connecting them at points 25 feet distant from the intersection of the street lines. 
Sec. 5.4. - Accessory Uses and Structures. 
5.4-1. An accessory structure shall not be permitted in any required front yard, except as specified in section 5.4-8. 
5.4-2. No accessory building or structure shall be erected beyond a required yard line along any street. 
5.4-3. Residential accessory uses such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
5.4-4. All residential accessory buildings must be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
5.4-5. Areas in which the accessory storage of a boat, boat trailer or travel trailer is permitted shall not include the required front yard. 
5.4-6. Gasoline station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than 15 feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least 14 feet in height, and the outermost edge shall be five feet from any property line. 
5.4-7. All nonresidential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessee or tenants of the premises, and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
5.4-8. An open or unenclosed swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that the pool is not located closer than six feet to a rear lot line or ten feet to an interior side lot line. A three-foot-wide walk space shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
Sec. 5.5. - Residential Home Occupations. 
The conduct of business in residential units may be permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to ensure the following: 
a.  Compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential zoning districts; 
b.  Maintenance and preservation of the character of residential neighborhoods and provision of peace, quiet and domestic tranquility within all residential neighborhoods. 
c.  Within the residential district, guarantee of all residents freedom from excessive noise, traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible effects of commercial uses being conducted in this district. 
Residential home occupations, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
5.5-1. A home occupation is subordinate to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used in connection with a home occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
5.5-2. No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within a single dwelling unit. 
5.5-3. A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal use. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages which are attached or detached. 
5.5-4. The residential home occupation is limited to employment of residents of the property and not more than one additional person. 
5.5-5. A home occupation shall produce no noise or obnoxious odors, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perceptions outside the principal structure. 
5.5-6. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupations in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street space and located in rear or side yard. 
5.5-7. On the premises, retail sales are prohibited except for the retail sales of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
5.5-8. There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
5.5-9. No on-street parking of business related vehicles (either marked or commercially equipped) shall be permitted at any home. No business related vehicles larger than a van, panel truck or pick up truck is permitted to park overnight on the premises. The number of business related vehicles is one. 
5.5-10. Permitted residential home occupations: 
a.  Architectural services. 
b.  Art studio. 
c.  Consulting services. 
d.  Data processing. 
e.  Dental technician and laboratory. 
f.  Direct sale product distribution (Amway, Avon, Jaffra, Mary Kay, Tupperware, etc.) provided there is no production on premises. 
g.  Drafting and graphic services. 
h.  Dressmaking, sewing, tailoring, contract sewing (one machine). 
i.  Electronic assembly. 
j.  Engineering service. 
k.  Financial planning or investment services. 
l.  Flower arranging. 
m.  Home office. 
n.  House cleaning service. 
o.  In-home child care, but not more than six children at a time, including the caregiver's own preschool children. 
p.  Insurance sales or broker. 
q.  Interior design. 
r.  Laundry and ironing service. 
s.  Locksmith. 
t.  Real estate sales, broker or appraisal service. 
u.  Telephone answering, switchboard call forwarding. 
v.  Tutoring, including all indoor and outdoor instructional services limited to two students at a time. 
w.  Writing, resume services, computer programming. 
5.5-11. Prohibited residential home occupations: 
a.  Ambulance service. 
b.  Restaurants, food preparation. 
c.  Automobile repair, parts sales, upholstery, or detailing, washing services. 
d.  Veterinary services (including care, grooming and boarding). 
Sec. 5.6. - Special-Density Lots for the Use of Family Homesteads. 
In order to perpetuate the family homestead in rural areas, each parcel in single ownership may be subdivided for use solely as a homestead by an individual who is the grandparent, parent, stepparent, adopted parent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the person who conveyed the parcel to said individual, at a density not to exceed one unit per acre. This provision supercedes other land use district density requirements, except that it may not be used within a platted subdivision. In order to qualify for the use of family homestead the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  The property being transferred must be used as the primary residence of the grantee. 
2.  The deed for transferred property must state the relationship of the grantee to the grantor. 
3.  Transferred property may be deeded in the heirs (grantee) name or jointly deeded in the grantor/grantee names. The transferred property may not be deeded solely in the grantor name. 
4.  This special density provision may be utilized on only one occasion per eligible individual grantee. The grantor may exercise this special density provision for other eligible individual grantees, so long as the maximum allowable density for the property transferred from the original parcel can be met. 
5.  An individual wishing to obtain a manufactured home or conventional building permit under these special density provisions shall make application to the county building and zoning department. Upon verification of the eligibility of the applicant, a permit may be issued. 
6.  Should the transferred property be subsequently sold or otherwise transferred to another party, including nonfamily party, these special density provisions shall remain. 
Sec. 5.7. - Medical Hardship Secondary Detached Dwelling. 
A manufactured home which meets type III appearance standards may be parked and occupied as a residence in a residential area where a medical hardship exists after application of a special use and approval of same from the Woodbury City Council. 
5.7-1. Medical Hardship is defined as a health or mental condition necessitating attention and supervision from the occupants of either the primary dwelling or the manufactured home. 
5.7-2. Occupants. Occupants of the primary dwelling shall provide proof to the zoning administrator that a secondary detached dwelling unit is necessary for the physical care and well being of the infirm person (doctor or medical facility affidavit, nursing home recommendation, etc.)[.] The occupants of the primary dwelling shall also provide approval by the Meriwether County Health Department of proper sewerage and water facilities. 
5.7-3. Permit Expiration. Once the state of "medical hardship" is removed, the land use permit for manufactured homes shall expire and the manufactured home shall be removed in a timely manner, but in no case longer than three months. 
5.7-4. Manufactured Home Secondary Detached Dwelling Permit. A manufactured home permit that is issued under this section shall expire 12 months from the date it is granted. A renewal of the permit must meet all requirements of a new application, however, no advertisement or posting of a sign shall be required. However, this manufactured home shall not be used for any other purpose than to provide assistance in the case of medical hardship. This manufactured home shall not be used for storage, commercial, home occupation or rented for economic gain by the home owner. 
5.7-5. Site-Built Secondary Detached Dwelling Permit. A site-built dwelling may be used as a secondary detached dwelling. It shall be no smaller than the requirements for an efficiency apartment as stated in article ????, table ???? and shall require a permit issued from the building and zoning department. This secondary detached dwelling shall be used for no other purpose than to provide assistance in the case of medical hardship. The site-built dwelling shall be treated the same as a manufactured home used for the same purpose except commercial, home occupation and rental use of the site built secondary detached dwelling, after the medical hardship is no longer necessary, shall be a special use and shall be allowed only upon approval of the city council. 
Sec. 5.8. - Cemeteries. 
All proposed cemeteries whether public, private or in conjunction with a religious institution shall not be located in a floodplain area as delineated by FIRM maps for the City of Woodbury. 
Sec. 5.9. - Property Maintenance. 
To ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Woodbury the following regulations shall be established for the maintenance of property in the city: 
5.9-1. Nonfunctioning appliances shall be stored in an enclosed accessory or principal building. Any unused appliances being stored such as refrigerators, freezers, stoves, etc., shall have doors removed prior to storage. 
5.9-2. Any major auto repairs such as building motors, transmissions or heavy body work shall be done in an enclosed accessory building or on a section of property not visible from the public street. 
5.9-3. Nonlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed accessory building. No more than three nonlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles shall be stored on property unless application for a junkyard has been issued by the Woodbury City Council. 
5.9-4. Yard sales shall last for a specified duration only. There shall not be any continuous yard sales in Woodbury. Storing of yard sale items shall be in an enclosed accessory or principal building and shall not be on display in any yard except during the hours of the yard sales. Yard sales may last eight hours a day no more than four days a month at the same residence. Yard sales shall be on a lot with an occupied principal building except for sales in commercially zoned districts. 
5.10-5. No abandoned mobile or manufactured homes shall be used as a storage or accessory building. Abandoned mobile/manufactured homes shall be removed from property at owner's expense and upon notification by the codes enforcement officer that the said mobile/manufactured home is abandoned and is causing a health or safety hazard to surrounding property owners. 
Sec. 5.12. - Junkyards, Junk Business or Salvage Operation. 
To ensure the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Woodbury the following shall state the regulations necessary for junkyards, junk businesses and salvage operations: 
5.12-1. The minimum lot area for a junkyard, junk business or salvage operation shall be ten acres. 
5.12-2. All junkyards, junk businesses or salvage operations shall be buffered in accordance with article ????, Buffer ???? .1-5. 
ARTICLE 6. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 6.1. - Establishment of Districts. 
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance, incorporated city limits of the City of Woodbury is hereby divided into the following districts: 

 
6.1-1. Single-family residential (R-30). The purpose of this district is to provide a low density residential district which is served by public water systems and sewerage systems. 
6.1-2. Multifamily residential (R-20). The purpose of this district is to provide a higher density residential district to accommodate single-family dwellings and duplex development and four-family units. This district shall be served by public water and sewerage systems. 
6.1-4. Single-Family Residential (R-10). This district is established to provide high density single-family residential areas served by water and sewerage systems. 
6.1-5. General Commercial (GC). This district is established to provide a location for commercial growth in neighborhoods and along highway corridors. 
6.1-7. Industrial District (I). This district is established to provide appropriate locations for industrial operations. 
6.1-8. Tree Preservation District (TPD). This district is intended to preserve and protect existing trees, in developed or undeveloped parcels, which have value because of shade, size, appearance or age. 
Sec. 6.2. - Zoning District Map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the map designated as the "Official Zoning District Map." The zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the notations references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth and described herein, which zoning district map is properly attested and is on file with the City of Woodbury Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 6.3. - District Boundaries. 
6.3-1. The district boundaries shown on the zoning district map are generally intended to follow streets, alleys or lot lines; where the districts designated on said map are bounded by such street, alley or lot line, the centerline of the street, alley or lot line shall be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is otherwise indicated on the map. In all other cases, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the official zoning map. 
6.3-2. When the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of adoption of this ordinance, the boundary line may be allowed to extend a distance of not more than 50 feet to the least restrictive zoned district. 
ARTICLE 7. - ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS AND PERMITTED USES 

Sec. 7.1. - District, Lot and Height Standards. 
The requirements regarding lot size, building size, and building placement on the lot for each zoning district shall be met as indicated in article 4, "General Provisions," and table 7.1: "District Area, Yard and Height Requirements." 
TABLE 7.1: DISTRICT AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

 
Sec. 7.2. - Appearance Standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings including site-built housing, industrialized housing, and manufactured houses. Approval shall be granted upon finding that such development shall meet or exceed the Appearance standards as shown on table 7.2: "Appearance Standards for Single-Family Detached Dwellings. 
TABLE 7.2: APPEARANCE STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS 

 
Notes: 
1.  The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, metal tiles, slate, built up gravel materials or other materials approved by the building inspectors. 
2.  The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal lap, vinyl lap, or other materials approved by the building inspector. 
3.  Permanent foundations shall meet the requirements of standard building code requirements for manufactured homes. For manufactured homes, a masonry curtain wall unpierced except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level. 
4.  For manufactured homes, a landing area is required and its width and length must be greater than or equal to the width of the entrance doorway. 
5.  Manufactured homes are required to remove all towing devices. 
6.  Manufactured homes which cannot remove towing devices shall be screened by plantings and the structure shall be skirted. 
Sec. 7.3. - Permitted Uses. 
No principal building, structure or land use shall be permitted except in the zoning districts indicated and for the purposes permitted in table 2.1. Each use is mutually exclusive and does not encompass other uses listed in the table. A principal use denoted by the letter "S" is permitted only if a special use permit is granted by the City of Woodbury Planning Commission. Special use permits are subject to standards for special uses stated in article ????. For uses not included on this list where the codes enforcement officer is unable to determine clear placement, application shall be made to the planning commission for an amendment to this table under provisions of this ordinance for text amendments to the zoning ordinance and in accordance with the zoning procedures act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

 
ARTICLE 8. - BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
A buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in dissimilar zone districts as shown in the following table 6.1 [8.1]. 
TABLE 8.1  BUFFER REQUIREMENTS BETWEEN DISSIMILAR ZONE DISTRICTS 

 

Sec. 8.1. - Determination of Buffer Requirements Between Residential, Commercial and Industrial Zones. 
When two adjoining properties are is dissimilar residential, commercial or industrial zone districts as indicated in Table ????, the property within the zone district allowing the most intensive uses is required to provide the buffer when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in dissimilar zone districts as indicated in table 3.1, no buffer is required when the parcel zoned for the less intensive use acquires a building permit. 
8.1-1. Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of plantings or a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), or a berm, which meets the screening standards of section 8.2. If plantings are chosen as the method of screening, the planting area shall have a minimum base width of 12 feet. 
8.1-2. Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a 50-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of section 8.2. 
8.1-3. Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of a 100-foot setback from the adjoining property line containing not less than a 20-foot base width consisting of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise part of a structure or accessory structure), a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of section 8.2. 
8.1-4. Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall consist of either an unvegetated 500-foot setback or 200-foot vegetated setback from the adjoining property line. A 200-foot minimum setback shall consist of 75 foot [feet] of vegetated buffer area, measured along the entire portion of the property line abutting said use, and such buffer shall extend an additional 100 feet in each direction along the common property line. The 75-foot vegetated buffer shall meet the screening requirements contained in section 8.2. 
Sec. 8.2. - Screening Standards. 
Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, a berm or densely planted vegetation. 
Plantings. Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will provide the best screening effectiveness. 
If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening device, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the city clerk which, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four years. They shall be planted a minimum 20 feet on center. 
If trees are used in combination with shrubs, they may be of any species from the list provided by the city clerk. Small trees shall be planted 30 feet on center, and large trees 40 feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the city clerk planted four feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six feet within three years after planting. 
Figure 1. 
Walls. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of eight feet. The wall shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intensive land use. 
Fences. Fences shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and constructed of standard wood fencing materials and methods or chain link with woven inserts that will provide 90 percent visual blockage as shown in the examples provided by the zoning administrator. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intensive land use. 
Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of eight feet. 
Sec. 8.3. - Buffer Design. 
All buffers required by this article shall conform to the following specifications: 
8.3-1. Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
8.3-2. Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
8.3-3. Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this article if the zoning administrator determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this article. 
Sec. 8.4. - Location of Buffers. 
Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lot lined adjoining dissimilar zones including adjacent property lines, which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
Sec. 8.5. - Variances. 
The requirements of this article may be waived by the City of Woodbury Planning Commission under any of the following conditions: 
8.5-1. It is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purpose of this article. 
8.5-2. It is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
8.5-3. The adjoining property owners mutually agree in writing that the required buffer is not necessary for a satisfactory use and enjoyment of their property rights. 
8.5-4. It is clearly demonstrated that an existing (or) proposed public right-of-way separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this article. 
Sec. 8.6. - Use of Buffers. 
A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike, equestrian trails, or as a stormwater retention area provided that: 
8.6-1. No planted materials shall be eliminated; and 
8.6-2. The total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained. 
Sec. 8.7. - Maintenance. 
The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. Any required plant that has died shall be replaced. Maintenance of planted areas shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials and necessary pruning. Fences and walls shall be kept in a condition that meets the requirements of this article. 
Sec. 8.8. - Failure To Comply With These Provisions. 
See article [section] 19.19 of this ordinance for penalty provisions. 
Sec. 8.9. - Surety for Buffer Installation. 
When the date for issuing a certificate of occupancy does not coincide with the planting conditions that are necessary to install a required buffer, the city clerk shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the city clerk and shall certify the following: 
8.9-1. That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing all buffers as estimated and approved by the building inspector; 
8.9-2. That in case of failure of the developer to complete the specified improvements, the creditor shall pay the government immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of the secured credit; and 
8.9-3. That the letter of credit or other surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released by the building inspector after final inspection and certification of approval of the buffer. 
ARTICLE 9. - SIGNS 

Sec. 9.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to permit signs that will not, by their size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger the public safety of individuals; confuse, mislead or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety; or otherwise endanger public health, safety, or welfare; and to permit and regulate signs in such a way as to support and complement objectives set forth in this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.2. - Location. 
The location of signs shall conform with state law. (See O.C.G.A. §§ 32-1-21; 32-50-51; 21-1-1, et al.) In general, except for government signs as allowed by state law, all signs shall be located on private property. 
Sec. 9.3. - General Provisions. 
9.3-1. Corner Visibility Clearance. In any district no sign or sign structure (above a height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign structure not more than ten inches in diameter, if located on a corner lot where services are provided to the motoring public, may be located within the required corner visibility area if all other requirements of this article are met and the lower elevation of the sign surface is at least ten feet above ground level. 
9.3-2. Lighting Restrictions. 
e.  Lighted, neon or luminous signs giving off light resulting in glare, blinding or any other adverse effect on traffic shall not be erected. 
f.  The light from illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
g.  No internally illuminated ground or pole signs shall be erected within 50 feet of any dwelling within a residential district. 
h.  No sign shall be erected if it contains, or is illuminated by any flashing intermittent or moving light or lights except an electronic message board sign. 
i.  No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign so as to confuse or mislead the traffic or hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal. 
9.3-3. Other Restrictions. 
a.  No sign shall be erected, attached, or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
b.  No sign shall be erected, attached, painted or drawn on any tree, rock or other natural feature, retaining wall or utility post along the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 9.4. - Sign Types and Standards. 
The following sign standards apply to all districts except as specified elsewhere in this article. If any other standards in this ordinance conflict with the standard in this article the stricter regulation shall apply. 
9.4-1. Pole Signs. Pole signs shall not extend over a public right-of-way. All signs abutting the right-of-way line shall have the display area ten feet or more above ground level measured from the grade at the right-of-way line. Signs with any portion of the display area less than ten feet above ground level must be erected ten feet from the right-of-way line. If the location of the sign structure is below the grade of the road, the height of the sign shall be measured from the nearest adjacent roadway. Within a commercial or industrial district, the maximum height shall be 20 feet. 
9.4-2. Ground Signs. Ground signs less than three feet high shall be set back at least three feet from the right-of-way line. Otherwise, such signs shall be set back ten feet from the right-of-way line. The maximum area of a ground sign shall be 40 square feet. 
9.4-3. Wall Signs and Flush-Mounted Canopy Signs. Wall signs and flush-mounted canopy signs (including signs attached flat against the wall or canopy and painted signs) shall be securely fastened by metal supports to the building surface along the sign's greatest dimension. They may project from the building up to 12 inches; however, if they project more than four inches from the building surface, they shall maintain a clear height of eight feet above ground level. Wall signs may not extend more than four feet above the parapet wall. 
a.  Individual Business. The total number of wall signs or canopy signs on all facades of a building is counted as one sign, and the total sign display area of each wall shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
b.  Multibusiness/Shopping Center. The maximum display area of wall signs or canopy signs for each business shall not exceed ten percent of the front facade of each individual business. 
9.4-4. Hanging Canopy Signs. All hanging canopy signs shall not exceed six square feet in size and the lowest extremity of the sign shall not be less than eight feet above the ground. 
9.4-5. Roof Signs. 
a.  Roof signs shall not project beyond the face of the exterior wall of the building on which they are located. 
b.  The highest point of a roof sign shall not exceed the ridge line of the roof. 
c.  Roof signs shall not be erected on buildings or structures with a flat roof. 
d.  The maximum size of a roof sign shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
9.4-6. Window Signs. Each ground level business having glass directly orientated to a street may use all of that glass area as one allowable sign, but no single window shall be covered more than 25 percent. Window signs on or above the second floor are prohibited except when a business has no ground floor frontage. 
9.4-7. Banners. The maximum size of a banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
Sec. 9.5. - Use of Signs Permitted by Districts. 
9.5-1. Business Signs. Business signs are permanently mounted signs, that are permitted in all districts allowing business activity. Except as specified below, all business signs shall meet the standards according to section 9.4. The maximum number of business signs for an establishment or development is listed in table 9.1. 
9.5-2. Nonbusiness Signs. Nonbusiness signs are permanently mounted signs that are permitted in all districts and shall meet the requirements as shown on table 9.2: Maximum Number of Nonbusiness Signs: 
a.  Announcing Signs. Announcing signs are signs used to announce activities to be held at any noncommercial place of public assembly. These signs may be ground or wall signs. 
b.  Commemorative Signs. Commemorative signs are tablets or plaques which identify a person, event, structure or a site of memorable public interest. These may be ground or wall signs. 
c.  Directional Signs. Directional signs are permanent off-premises, nonilluminated ground signs erected only by churches, government agencies and nonprofit organizations which provide direction to such church, organization, agency or related facility. 
TABLE 9.1 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF BUSINESS SIGNS 

 
Sign standards refer to section 9.4: Sign Types and Standards 
X — Permitted by Right 
a.  Identification Signs. Identification signs bear only the names or addresses of occupants of the premises and bearing no commercial message other than that of the use identified. These signs may be wall or ground signs. 
b.  Instructional Signs. Signs exclusive of any commercial messages except the business name and/or logo, which conveys instructions to the public such as entrance, exit, no trespassing, no dumping, no hunting, height clearance, etc. These signs may be wall or ground signs. 
TABLE 9.2: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF NONBUSINESS SIGNS 

 
* Permitted Sign Types: Ground, wall or canopy signs only. 
9.5-3. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all districts. 
a.  Temporary Construction Signs. Signs erected on the premises where construction is taking place which indicate the names of individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the construction of the structures or project. 
1.  Temporary construction signs may be pole, ground or wall signs. 
2.  Only one sign shall be allowed per street frontage. 
3.  The maximum sign display area of each sign shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
4.  The period of existence of such signs shall be one month prior to commencement of construction through one month following completion. 
b.  Temporary Political Signs. Signs which announce or support political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election. The following requirements shall apply: 
1.  A temporary sign permit is required according to section 9.8-2 prior to the erection of such signs. 
2.  All signs shall be ground or pole signs and shall be set back ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
3.  The maximum height of each sign shall not exceed eight feet measuring from the grade level of the sign. The sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
4.  Signs shall be erected prior to the date that the candidate qualifies for the election, or the filing of the issue for certification of the ballot. 
5.  Signs shall be removed within seven days after the election including any runoff which the sign is intended to influence. 
6.  Signs shall not be erected without the permission of the property owner. 
7.  At any time, the City of Woodbury is empowered to remove or cause removal of all signs not conforming with the provisions of this article without notice to the candidate whose signs create the non-conformity. This requirement, however, does not demand forfeiture of the bond that is posted for a permit (see section 9.8-2(b)). 
c.  Temporary Real Estate Signs. Signs erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or sale. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, rental or lease of the property advertised; however, the use of a "SOLD" attachment to a sign pending the completion of a sales transaction shall not be construed as a sale. 
1.  All temporary real estate signs may be pole, ground, window or wall signs. 
2.  Under no circumstances shall the display area of a temporary real estate sign exceed the following size: 

 
d.  Temporary Real Estate Directional Signs. Off-premises signs which provide directions to properties for sale, lease or rent. 
1.  All temporary real estate directional signs shall be ground signs only. 
2.  The display area of each sign shall exceed eight square feet. 
e.  Temporary Garage Sale Signs. 
1.  Temporary garage sale signs shall be ground signs only and their maximum size shall not exceed four square feet. 
2.  Signs may be erected two days prior to sale and shall be removed no later than midnight on the last day of sale. 
f.  Special-Event Signs. Special-event signs announce special civic activities, events or shows to be held in the near future. Special event signs shall be banner signs or any permitted temporary signs provided that a temporary sign permit is obtained according to section 9.8-2(b) prior to the erection of such signs. 
Sec. 9.6. - Prohibited Signs. 
Any sign that will pose public safety hazards are prohibited. Existing prohibited signs shall be removed 180 days after the effective date of this ordinance. The following types of signs and displays, as they are defined herein, are unlawful to erect or maintain in all zoning districts: 
9.6-1. Abandoned Signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer being conducted or available on the premises on which the signs are located. The signs must be removed upon notification to and order of the codes enforcement officer. 
9.6-2. Animated Signs. Animated, series, lines or rows or electric, neon signs that involve motion. 
9.6-3. Bench Signs. Benches, including courtesy benches, trash cans and similar devices on which advertising is displayed. 
9.6-4. Projecting Signs. Signs that project more than 12 inches from the building surface. 
9.6-5. Portable Signs. All portable signs, including hot air balloons and gas/air-inflatable signs. 
9.6-6. Temporary Signs. Except as otherwise permitted by or exempted from these regulations. 
9.6-7. Moving Signs. 
9.6-8. Pendants and Streamers. 
9.6-9. Banners. Except as permitted in special events. 
Sec. 9.7. - Billboards. 
9.7-1. State Codes. All billboards shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 (1969 Ga. Laws, page 426, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws, ex sess., page 5, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 947, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 1086, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 1017, § 1) through O.C.G.A. § 36-6-97 (1971 Ga. Laws, ex. sess., page 5, § 20; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 947, § 1) on the erection of outdoor advertising, etc., in areas adjacent to right-of-way of roads in the state highway system, and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the full reference provisions. Any billboard that advertises an activity, business, product or service which has ceased operation or production shall be removed within six months of the discontinuance of said activity, business, product or service. 
9.7-2. Location. 
a.  Billboards shall be permitted only in the general commercial (GC) and industrial (I) districts. 
b.  No billboard shall be erected within 300 feet of the nearest property line of any public park, public playground, public school, recreational area, historic site, church or similar institution. No billboard shall be placed within 100 feet of a residential district. 
9.7-3. Size and Number. No single billboard (display area and attached trim) shall exceed 300 square feet (12;ft; × 25;ft;) in size. No more than one sign per sign structure will be allowed to face the same direction. 
9.7-4. Linear Spacing. No billboard shall be erected within 1,000 feet of another billboard on the same side of the street as measured along a line parallel to such street. 
9.7-5. Setback and Height. All billboards shall be set back ten feet from the right-of-way line of any street or highway and shall be ten feet or more above the adjacent pavement level of the street or highway to which it is oriented. The total height of the billboard shall not be greater than 25 feet when measured from the grade level of the adjacent street or highway or at the grade of the sign site if such grade is above the grade of the street. 
9.7-6. Extrusion Prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of the sign, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
9.7-7. Illumination. All illuminated signs shall use base-mounted flourescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights are prohibited. 
Sec. 9.8. - Administration. 
9.8-1. Construction and Maintenance. 
a.  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in constant repair and unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall be periodically given a protective coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
b.  The provisions and regulations of this ordinance shall not apply to the ordinary servicing, repairing, cleaning or changing of the message without a change in structure. 
9.8-2. Sign Permit. 
a.  General Requirements. 
1.  A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from or supported on a building or structure; and before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or materially improved to an extent of 60 percent of its total replacement value. Listed below are signs that require a permit: 
Business Signs 
Billboards 
Special-Event Signs (Temporary Permit) 
Temporary Political Signs (Temporary Permit) 
2.  A sign permit shall be issued by the city clerk of Woodbury when the plans, specifications and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and the building code as certified by the city clerk. The application shall be accompanied by plans which identify the locations of signs and other applicable information that the city clerk may be required in the exercise of sound discretion in acting upon the application. 
3.  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of issuance. 
b.  Temporary Permit. 
1.  Special-Event Signs. The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue temporary permits for special-event signs to be placed along the streets of the City of Woodbury whereby the public will be informed about an upcoming event or directed to the location of an event. Said temporary permit shall require a $200.00 cash bond and shall allow the signs to be posted no earlier than ten days prior to the event. 
2.  Temporary Political Signs. The city clerk is hereby authorized to issue a temporary permit for political signs to be placed along the streets of the City of Woodbury whereby the public will be informed about a candidate or directed to a political event. Said temporary permit shall require a $200.00 cash bond and no political signs shall be erected prior to the candidates qualifying day as established by applicable federal, state or local law.* 
* All special-event and political signs authorized by temporary permit must be removed by the permittee within seven days after such event or election has been held or the $200.00 cash bond is forfeited. 
9.8-3. Permit Fee. 
a.  No permit shall be issued until an application accompanied with a sign plan is approved by the city clerk and fees paid as posted in city hall in the City of Woodbury. 
b.  A permit fee shall be paid to the City of Woodbury for each permit required by this ordinance. The fee shall be increased in direct relation to the increase in the dollar value of the sign and type of sign, according to the rate schedule in city hall in the City of Woodbury. 
Sec. 9.9. - Nonconforming Signs. 
Refer to article 10 of this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.10. - Enforcement. 
9.10-1. Violation. If any sign is erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the city clerk shall have the power to give the owner thereof written notice of such violation. The notice shall include a brief statement of the particulars in which such violation is to be remedied. If a sign has not been registered and the owner is not known, affixing a copy of the notice to the sign, graphic structure or building for a period of ten days shall be sufficient. 
9.10-2. Penalties. If such violation is not remedied within 30 days after such notice, the owner shall remove the sign immediately or be subject to a $100.00 a day fine for each day, with each act or omission considered a separate violation. 
9.10-3. Removal. If the sign is not removed by the owner, the city council shall have the right to remove such sign at the expense of the owner thereof and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the sign. In addition to the above provisions, the city council may cause the sign or structure to be removed which: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe; 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reasons of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment; 
c.  Is not kept in good repair; or 
d.  Is capable of causing electrical shock, to be removed following notice of 24 hours to the owner at the expense of the owner and to destroy or otherwise dispose of the same. 
ARTICLE 10. - NONCONFORMITY 

Sec. 10.1. - Nonconforming Lots. 
Any lots for which a plat or legal description has been recorded with the Meriwether County Clerk of Court at the time of passage of this ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, may be used for any of the uses permitted within the district by this ordinance, or if occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, may have the structure improved, enlarged or extended; provided that in either case: 
a.  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side and rear yard, height and floor area shall be complied with. 
b.  A lot to be used for duplexes, multifamily dwellings, residential group development projects, or manufactured homes, when allowed within the district, only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
Sec. 10.2. - Nonconforming Uses of Land. 
Nonconforming uses of land consists of the open use of property (including such uses but not limited to storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junkyards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, manufactured housing parks and similar open uses) where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance: 
a.  When a nonconforming use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any other nonconforming use. 
b.  Nonconforming uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses. 
c.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming. 
d.  When any nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 10.3. - Nonconforming Uses of Structures. 
Nonconforming uses of structures consists of structures used, at the time of passage of this ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located. In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, nonconforming uses of structures shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
a.  An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall only be changed to a conforming use. 
b.  An existing nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
c.  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
d.  When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or nonuse of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 10.4. - Nonconforming Signs. 
a.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except when the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or replacement of removable letters and numbers on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
b.  Repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted to maintain a safe condition and neat appearance so long as the sign remains substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance. However, no changes in the size or shape of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
Sec. 10.5. - Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures. 
When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use or nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be reconstructed as a nonconforming use only if the damage totals less than 50 percent of the value of the structure. If the nonconforming structure is damaged more than 50 percent the structure may be rebuilt only if it conforms to the zoning ordinance as adopted. Nonconforming manufactured homes located in a manufactured home park may be replaced according to type III appearance standards. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall also be governed by this provision. 
Sec. 10.5. - Restoration to a Safe Condition. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the restoration of any structure or use to a safe or sanitary condition, nor shall the ordinance prevent regular maintenance of any nonconforming use or structure. 
Sec. 10.6. - Change, Enlargement or Reestablishment of a Nonconforming Use. 
The city council of the City of Woodbury may grant the change, reestablishment or enlargement of a nonconforming use or the enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming structure upon the following findings: 
1.  The change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use. 
2.  The structure cannot be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the district. 
3.  The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming uses would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
4.  The proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, replacement or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this zoning ordinance. 
5.  The requirements of the zoning ordinance for rezoning would prevent the current zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement. 
Sec. 10.7. - Applications. 
Applications submitted to the city council requesting the change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or replacement of a nonconforming use or structure shall include the following information: 
1.  The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the city council that the use or structure: 
a.  Shall not cause substantial detriment to the public good; 
b.  Could not be economically converted to a conforming use; 
c.  That the present use is legally nonconforming; 
d.  That change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use; 
e.  That the structure has such value, that removal, to permit conforming structures, would cause economic hardship to the owner. 
2.  The applicant shall submit a plat or an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot, size and location of all structures and their distance from all property lines, the names of all streets which the property abuts and all parking spaces. 
3.  If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be submitted to describe the business. This description shall include hours of operation, number of employees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs, and other information as needed for the city council to reach an informed decision. 
Sec. 10.8. - City Council Action. 
If the requested change, reestablishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement is approved, the city council may place conditions on the approval to ensure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these conditions. 
Sec. 10.9. - Changes in Zoning. 
Any nonconformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of this section [article]. 
ARTICLE 11. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic, ch. 46. 

Sec. 11.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations to foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians on private and public streets and to minimize nuisances from on-street parking. 
Sec. 11.2. - Off-Street Parking. 
a.  Off-Street Automobile Parking and Storage. Off-street parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this section are established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth in table 11.1. Each automobile parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and 20 feet long. 
b.  [ Use of Other Space. ] If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the zoning board may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within 500 feet of such principal use. Such space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
c.  [ Backing Onto Street. ] All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single-family residential uses shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the premises. 
d.  [ Gross Leasable Area. ] Gross leasable area (GLA) is the total building floor area in square feet that a developer may lease. Gross floor area is the sum of the areas of floors of a building, including all areas for human occupancy, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls but excluding unenclosed porches, interior parking spaces or any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet six inches. 
e.  Improvement and Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be graded in [to] ensure proper drainage, surfaces with all-weather gravel, asphalt or concrete materials and maintained in a clean, orderly and dustfree condition. 
f.  Bumper Guards. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with all-weather gravel materials, a bumper guard or wheel stop shall be installed to mark each space. 
g.  Marking. If the off-street parking area is surfaced with concrete or asphalt, each parking space shall be painted with stripes, not less than three inches wide, running the length of each of the longer sides of the space or by other acceptable methods which clearly delineate the parking space within the parking lot. 
h.  Handicapped Parking. Parking for the handicapped within a nonresidential district shall be provided at a size, number and location according to the requirements of the ADA accessibility guidelines (ASAAG), published by the U.S. Architectural and Transportation Barrier Compliance Board (ATBCB), as amended. 
Sec. 11.3. - Residential Parking. 
All parking areas serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  If garages or carports are converted to living area, then the off-street parking requirements must be met elsewhere on the lot. 
b.  No inoperable vehicle shall be permitted in any residential district for more than 14 days unless it is in an enclosed garage. All repairs shall be in an enclosed garage in residential districts. 
c.  No commercial vehicle as licensed by the state with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) exceeding 11,000 pounds shall be allowed to park in R-1, R-14, or multifamily residential districts unless it can be completely enclosed. 
d.  Commercial vehicles, licensed by the state, buses and recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any residential district. 
e.  Recreational vehicles shall not be allowed to park overnight on the street in any residential district. 
f.  Recreational vehicles are prohibited from parking in the front yard of any residential district and must be parked in an area of the yard least visible from any public street. 
TABLE 11.1  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY USES 

 
Sec. 11.4. - Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading or unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, a street. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back into a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. 
a.  Retail Business and Services. A space ten feet by 25 feet for each 20,000 square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
b.  Wholesale and Industry. One space ten feet by 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor space plus one additional space for each 60,000 additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
c.  Bus and Truck Terminal. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
ARTICLE 12. - TREE PRESERVATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 12.1. - Introduction. 
The tree preservation district is not intended to prescribe a specific land use but rather to define a range of acceptable land uses. The tree protection district is therefore designed as an overlay district. Within the range of land uses which can be located within the district, there is a set of performance standards which apply to development within the district. Each parcel of land within the tree protection district shall be subject to provisions, regulations, and restrictions of both the tree protection district and its underlying district(s). In the event of a conflict or discrepancy between the requirements of the tree protection district overlay and the underlying district(s), the more stringent shall apply. 
Sec. 12.2. - Findings of Fact. 
Trees are recognized to be a valuable asset providing a healthier and more beautiful environment in which to live. Trees are economically beneficial in attracting new residents and visitors. Trees enhance the marketability of property and are valuable in providing shade and cooling effects as well as preventing area noise and visual pollution. Trees also prevent erosion and provide flood control measures. 
Sec. 12.3. - Purpose. 
Trees improve control of soil erosion, moderate surface runoff (thereby improving water quality and reducing flooding), reduce some air pollutants, reduce noise and glare, enhance habitat for desirable wildlife, moderate the climate, and contribute to aesthetics and scenic amenity. It is therefore recognized that trees enhance the value of property and as such are an economic asset of the community, promoting the stability of residential neighborhoods. It is further recognized that a well-maintained natural environment reflects pride in the community and attracts persons to live, work, and conduct business in this area. Therefore it is the intent of these regulations to encourage the protection of trees through sound, responsible land development practices and to provide minimum standards toward that end. 
Sec. 12.4. - Description of Tree Preservation District. 
The tree protection overlay district shall be delineated on the official zoning map of the county/city and will be subject to the following standards in addition to the standards of the underlying district(s). These overlay districts will be defined by the city council or by a tree board appointed by the city council. 
Sec. 12.5. - Protective Measures. 
In the tree protection district, protective measures shall be applied to the aboveground portion of a tree which is nonpine, larger than four inches in diameter, at an aboveground height of 4½ feet and to roots within the critical root zone, as follows: 
12.5-1. Damage prohibited. No person shall 
a.  Cut, carve, transplant, or otherwise damage or remove any tree; 
b.  Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; 
c.  Allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, paint) to come in contact with them; or 
d.  Set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
12.5-2. Fence required. During excavation, filling, construction, or demolition operations, each tree or stand of trees shall be protected against damage to bark, roots, and low-hanging branches with a fence enclosing the critical root zone (four feet high, two-inch by four-inch posts; with double one-inch by four-inch rails, plastic construction area fencing, or 12-gauge two-inch by four-inch wire mesh). Tree save area signs shall be posted on all sides of the fenced area. 
12.5-3. Compaction Prohibited. All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
12.5-4. Grade Change Prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone. Stripping of topsoil in the critical root zone shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system approved by the building official. Deposition of sediment in the critical root zone shall be prevented by placement barriers, which shall be backed by two-foot by four-foot wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
12.5-5. Ditches, Trenches Prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch, tunnel, or trench within the critical root zone. Where such encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, tunneling rather than trenching shall be used. If roots must be cut, root pruning procedures approved by the building official must be employed. 
12.5-6. Paving Prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the critical root zone. 
The tree protection district shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Tracts of land for which the zoning ordinance imposes no yard requirements and permits 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings. 
2.  Property already an owner-occupied single-family dwelling, unless: 
a.  Nonresidential uses or additional dwelling units are proposed for such property; or 
b.  Construction, paving or other activity on the property will damage trees on the public right-of-way. 
Sec. 12.6. - Removal of Trees. 
Trees in the tree protection district shall be removed only when in compliance with the following criteria: 
12.6-1. Trees which have been damaged by storm or disease. 
12.6-2. Trees which are obstructing the view on a public right-of-way which cannot be pruned to provide desired line of sight. 
12.6-3. Any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, water lines, or other public improvements. 
Sec. 12.7. - Criteria for Replacement Trees. 
12.7-1. Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
12.7-2. The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
12.7-3. The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
12.7-4. Preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three inches in diameter. 
12.7-5. Where trees must be added to achieve adequate coverage, pines may not comprise more than 40 percent of the total amount of replacement trees. Where existing pines already comprise 40 percent or more of the tree space, no more pines may be planted. 
12.7-6. Trees removed on city property must be replanted within 30 days or at proper tree planting time. 
Sec. 12.8. - Maintenance. 
The property owner shall maintain trees on property in accordance with this overlay district and underlying district(s), including replacing trees which die or are irreparably damaged. The trees in public parks, recreation areas, or any property owned by the county will be maintained by the county in accordance with this overlay and underlying district(s). 
ARTICLE 13. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE  1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE  ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 13.1. - . 
This ordinance shall be administered by the zoning administrator of the City of Woodbury, in cooperation with the planning commission, and the city council of the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 
13.1-1. Zoning Administrator. There is hereby created the office of zoning administrator of the City of Woodbury, Georgia. 
1.  Duties and Authority. The zoning administrator shall administer the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and shall: 
a.  Serve as administrative secretary to the planning commission. 
b.  Maintain public records concerning the administration of the zoning ordinance, including all maps, amendments, certificates of zoning compliance, special uses, variances, and records of public hearings. 
c.  Collect data and keep informed as to the best zoning practices in order to be qualified to make recommendations to the planning commission, all of which must be approved by the city council. 
d.  Undertake other relevant duties as may be delegated by the mayor or city council. 
Sec. 13.2. - The City of Woodbury Planning Commission. 
13.2-1. There is hereby created the City of Woodbury, Georgia, Planning Commission whose purpose is to carry out provisions of the City of Woodbury Zoning Ordinance assigned to it and within applicable provisions of the laws of Georgia. This zoning ordinance, including the official zoning maps, may be amended by the City of Woodbury City Council on its own motion, on a petition, or on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
1.  Membership. Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the City of Woodbury Council. The commission shall consist of five members who are citizens of the City of Woodbury and who shall be appointed for three-year terms, beginning on January 5 through January 5 of each year, or until their successors shall be appointed. No member shall hold any elective public office within the City of Woodbury. Unexpired terms shall be filled by the city council. Members are removable for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
2.  Procedure. The planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman (who shall be acting chairman in the absence of the chairman) on an annual basis. 
13.2-2. The chairman (or in his absence the vice-chairman) shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the commission and decide all points of order or procedure. The chairman shall appoint any committees which may be found necessary. The chairman shall be the deciding vote in any vote ending in a tie. 
13.2-3. The zoning administrator (secretary to the planning commission) shall conduct all correspondence of the planning commission; keep a minutes' book recording attendance, the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent, the failure to vote, indicating such fact; keep records of examination and hearing and other official action; and shall carry out such other official duties as may be assigned by the commission. 
13.2-4. Meetings of the planning commission will be held the first Thursday of every month. Notice must be provided to each member at least 48 hours prior to such meeting and that such other public notice as required by law is provided and abided by. The zoning administrator shall inform the members of the planning commission meetings. 
13.2-5. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of all business. 
13.2-6. Neither the zoning administrator, nor any member of the planning commission shall appear for or represent any person in any matter pending before the planning commission. No member of the planning commission shall hear or vote upon an appeal in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested in a personal or financial way. The order of business at the meeting shall be as follows: 
1.  Roll call. 
2.  Review and approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
3.  Report of committees (if any). 
4.  Unfinished business. 
5.  Hearing of cases. 
6.  New business. 
13.2-7. Failure to attend three consecutive meetings or more shall be considered automatic resignation from the planning commission, and upon such resignation by other means, or other vacancies occurring in office, the chairman or secretary (zoning administrator) shall inform the city council of such occurrence as promptly as possible, so that the council may appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term. 
Sec. 13.3. - Initiation of Amendments. 
13.3-1. Applications to amend this ordinance may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the official zoning map(s). An application to amend the text of the zoning ordinance may be initiated by the zoning administrator, be submitted to the planning commission by the city council, or by any owner of property (or his/her designated agent) in the city. An application to amend the official zoning map(s) may be initiated by an individual property owner or his agent, the zoning administrator, or be submitted to the planning commission by the city council. Unless initiated by the city council or the zoning administrator, all applications to amend the official zoning map(s) must be submitted by the owner (or his/her designated agent) and shall be accompanied by an appropriate fee as posted in city hall, set by the city council. Such authorization of property ownership shall be notarized and attached to the application. An application for an amendment to the zoning map(s) affecting the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, said intervals to begin with the date of final decision by the city council. 
Sec. 13.4. - Application for Amendments. 
13.4-1. Each application to amend this ordinance or the official zoning map(s) shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The initiation of all amendments must be submitted by written request from the planning commission, zoning administrator or and [an] individual property owner. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
13.4-2. Text amendment applications shall include the following: 
1.  Name and address of applicant. 
2.  Current provisions of text to be affected by amendment. 
3.  Proposed wording of text change. 
4.  Reason for amendment request. 
13.4-3. Map amendment applications shall include the following: 
1.  A legal description of the tract(s) to be rezoned, including the street address and subdivision, if any, or area in which the tract is located. 
2.  Seven copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district; the dimensions, acreage and location of that tract(s); floodplain and flood hazard areas; unusual topographical features; current zoning of subject tract and all adjacent properties; and existing structures. This plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect, a planner with an AICP certification or land surveyor whose seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
3.  When any applicant or his attorney for a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of that applicant's application for the rezoning action, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official who will consider the application, it shall be the duty of the applicant to file a disclosure report with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amount and description of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at the time of application for the rezoning action. 
4.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; together with a written notarized authorization for the owner(s) agents, if any, to seek rezoning. 
5.  A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. 
6.  The name and address of abutting property owners as indicated by the City of Woodbury tax records. 
7.  Each zoning map amendment application, whether submitted by local government, or by a party other than local government shall include with it to be complete a written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
e.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive land use plan. 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
13.4-4. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a schedule adopted annually by the planning commission which shall provide that each application shall be submitted at least 50 days prior to the date on which it is to be considered by the city council and in any event in sufficient time so as to permit advance advertising and notice of any public hearing(s) pursuant to the terms of this section and state law. Each application for an amendment to the official zoning ordinance text or map shall be assessed a fee as posted in city hall of the City of Woodbury to defray administrative costs. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the city council or zoning administrator. 
13.4-5. An application may be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required by this section shall have first appeared. An applicant may also withdraw an application before legal advertising and in writing to the zoning administrator. 
13.4-6. An applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions, and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application provided, however, that any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission. If any such conditions or alterations or changes thereto are proposed by an applicant and have not been filed as required by this subsection, the planning commission, at the time of the public hearing on the application, may defer any action on such application to a specific meeting date. The date designed for action on the application shall be set at a time which will allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection. 
13.4-7. If after one year from rezoning, the approved use has not been developed as stated in the rezoning application or building permit has not been issued, the rezoning shall become invalid. A lot or parcel may revert to previously zoned status only after notification in writing to the applicant from the planning commission. Explanation of the delay shall be in writing from the applicant to the planning commission within five business days of receiving written notification that the year deadline for development has occurred. After review of the explanation from the applicant the planning commission may extend the rezoning or require a new application for rezoning to be filed with the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 13.5. - Planning Study. 
13.5-1. The zoning administrator (or his/her designatee) upon receiving an application to amend the official zoning map(s), shall do the following: 
1.  With respect to an application to amend the official zoning map(s), consider and evaluate each of the matters set forth in [section] 13.4-3.6 a.—f. 
2.  Consult with other departments of the city to fully evaluate the impact of any land use or zoning district change upon public facilities and services including, but not limited to schools, drainage, traffic, and related facilities. 
3.  Conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area. 
4.  When required, submit a written record of her/his investigation and recommendations to the planning commission, said report shall be a matter of public record. 
13.5-2. The zoning administrator may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the zoning district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served, and the health, public safety, and general welfare secured. 
Sec. 13.6. - Planning Commission Action. 
13.6-1. The planning commission shall hold a meeting on each application in accordance with a schedule as stated in article [section] 13.2-4 or as needed. Any recommendations on each application shall be submitted to the planning commission. In addition, the planning commission shall with respect to each application consider each of the matters set forth in [section] 13.4-3.6a.—f. As to each application, the planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, denial, deferral, withdrawal without prejudice or no recommendation. The planning commission's action may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, or recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured. A written report of the planning commission's investigation and recommendation, along with the investigation and recommendation of the zoning administrator, shall be submitted to the city council and shall be public record. The failure of the planning commission to take any action as to a particular petition within 60 days of the public hearing will be tantamount to an approval recommendation thereof. 
Sec. 13.7. - Public Notification. 
13.7-1. Legal Notice. Due notice of the public hearing before the city council shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation for the City of Woodbury in which is carried the legal advertisements of the city by advertising the application and date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearings at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first hearing conducted by the city council. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning map(s), then this notice also shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
13.7-2. Signs Posted. As to an application to amend the official zoning map(s), the zoning administrator (or a designatee) shall post a sign at least 15 days and no more than 45 days in advance of the city council's hearings, in a conspicuous place on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the application and date, time, and place of the public hearing before the city council. 
13.7-3. Letters. As to an application to amend the official zoning map(s), the zoning administrator shall send letters to abutting property owners at least 15 days and no more than 45 days in advance of the public hearing before the city council. Letters shall include information as to the application and date, time, and place of the public hearing. If the city council or planning commission initiates a zoning change due to changing conditions in the city which require changing the names and standards of zoning districts a notification in the legal organ of the city shall be used in lieu of sending letters to all citizens. 
Sec. 13.8. - Standards for the Exercise of Zoning Power. 
13.8-1. In addition to the standards enumerated in other sections of this ordinance, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following matters in reference to any rezoning application: 
1.  The existing land use patterns. 
2.  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities and streets. 
3.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence living conditions in the neighborhood. 
4.  Whether the proposed change will create or excessively increase traffic congestion or otherwise affect public safety. 
5.  Whether the proposed change will create adverse environmental impacts to water, erosion and sedimentation control regulations, or sewerage systems. 
6.  Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in the adjacent area. 
7.  Whether the proposed change will seriously reduce light and air to adjacent areas. 
8.  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
9.  Whether the change suggested is out of scale with the needs of the neighborhood or the county. 
10.  The extent to which the proposed change is consistent with the comprehensive plan, adopted by the city council. 
11.  Any other factors relevant to balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. 
12.  Whether or not any parcel is located in a wetland as determined by the Wetland Protection District Map and by determination of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the corps determines that wetlands are present, a section 404 permit pursuant to the Clean Water Act is required to be issued before any parcel is rezoned, building or development permit is issued. 
Sec. 13.9. - Conflict of Interest and Disclosure Rules. 
13.9-1. Any of the City of Woodbury City Council persons who know or reasonably should know that he or she: 
1.  Has any direct ownership in any real property to be affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the City of Woodbury government; 
2.  Has a ten percent or more direct ownership interest in the total assets or capital stock in any business entity which has any direct ownership in any real property affected by a rezoning action under consideration by the City of Woodbury; or 
3.  Has a spouse, parent, sibling or child with any interest as described in previous 1. and 2.; 
shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest, in writing, to the City of Woodbury City Council as soon as he or she knows of its existence. Such an official, which shall include members of the city council, or planning commission also shall disqualify himself/herself from voting on the rezoning action and shall not take any other action on behalf of himself or herself or anyone else to influence action on the rezoning action. Any written disclosures made pursuant to this section which result in the inability of the city council to obtain a quorum for the purpose of making a final decision when considering a rezoning action, the city council shall initiate the special master process set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-67a-5, as amended. Moreover, questions of interpretation as to the application of this statute should be resolved by reference to the Georgia state law governing campaign contribution disclosures, O.C.G.A. § 36-671-1 et seq., as amended. 
13.9-2. When any opponent of a rezoning action has made, within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a local government official of the local government which will consider the application, and it shall be the duty of the opponent to file a disclosure with the governing authority of the respective local government showing: 
a.  The name and official position of the local government official to whom the campaign contribution was made; and 
b.  The dollar amounts and description of each campaign contribution made by the opponent to the local government official during the two years immediately preceding the filing of the application for the rezoning action and the date of each such contribution. 
The disclosure required by this section shall be filed at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the local government or any of its agencies on the rezoning application. 
Sec. 13.10. - Procedures for Public Hearing. 
13.10-1. These rules apply to public hearings before the planning commission or the city council. The word "chairman" may be substituted for mayor depending on who is presiding over the public hearing. There may be more than one hearing regarding amendments to the zoning ordinance, however, there shall be at least one hearing by the city council. 
The chairman of the City of Woodbury Planning Commission shall open the hearing with an explanation of the purpose of the hearing and a description of the general rules for the conducting of the hearing. The chairman or his delegate may describe the authority and role of the planning commission or city council in any zoning decision. The chairman or his delegate shall chair the hearing and shall determine the relevance of any proposed comment or presentation to the planning commission or city council in the hearing and is authorized to rule any individual or a portion of any presentation out of order if not relevant to the published purpose of the hearing. Any person addressing the chairman and planning commission or city council shall respond to questions of the chairman and planning commission. Remarks shall be made to the chairman only and not to other members of the commission or audience. Any unused portion of allotted time unused by either the applicant or opponent shall not invalidate any proceedings or action taken on the proposed amendment. The following rules of procedure govern the public hearing on rezoning or similar matters (special uses) before the City of Woodbury [Planning] Commission. These rules apply to all such public hearing items appearing on any agenda. 
1.  Procedures relating to application, notice, and advertisement of items on the public hearing agenda shall conform to the requirements of Georgia law and the City of Woodbury codes. 
2.  Exercise of the zoning power shall conform to the standards expressed in the City of Woodbury Zoning Ordinance, as most recently amended, as well as with the comprehensive land use plan. 
3.  The zoning administrator shall provide a limited number of copies of the policies required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which copies shall be available on request to interested members of the public. 
4.  Individuals desiring to address the planning commission or city council regarding an agenda item are required to contact the city clerk. Applicants and/or proponents of an item on the public hearing agenda shall be heard first and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Failure of the applicant or his/her representative to be present for the hearing shall result in automatic termination of any proceedings on the amendment and a negative recommendation on the proposed amendment by the chairman of the planning commission of the City of Woodbury. Opponents of the issue may respond and shall have a maximum of ten minutes in which to present any information pertinent to the issue to be decided. Applicants or proponents may use any unused portion of their ten minutes for rebuttal. No new issues shall be brought forth during the rebuttal by either the applicant or opponent. 
5.  In the event there is more than one speaker per side, speakers must divide their time or designate a spokesperson in order to complete their full presentation within the time allotment. 
6.  Any remark amounting to an attack on the character or personal integrity of another individual, comment not factually supportable, comment in the form of an emotional outburst, [or] comment not directed at the chairman shall be considered to be nonrelevant to the purpose of the hearing and shall be ruled out of order. 
7.  The chairman or his delegate shall enter into the record after the presentation of the applicant or his/her representative any written comment, petition, or similar written statement received by the chairman and commission prior to the hearing and the same shall be considered by the chairman and commission along with comments and other relevant information of the hearing in making any zoning decision concerning the proposed zoning amendment. At the public hearing, the city council shall review the reports prepared by the zoning administrator and planning commission. 
8.  When proponents and opponents of the proposed zoning amendment have been herd [heard] in accordance with the foregoing procedures, the chairman or his delegate shall declare the public hearing closed. No further public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment shall be required prior to the zoning decision. 
9.  Copies of these procedures shall be provided at each public hearing. 
Sec. 13.11. - Action by City Council. 
The city council shall consider the standards in [section] 13.4-3.6 a.—f. in evaluating each application. So that the purpose of this ordinance will be served, health, public safety, and general welfare secured, the city council may approve the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, add or delete conditions of the application, deny an application, or defer consideration of an application to acquire additional information. An action by the council to defer the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application and no further notice is required. The final decision by the city council shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the applicant. Any amendment involving changes to the official map(s) must be made within three business days after approval by the city council. No amendment becomes effective until entered upon said map(s). 
13.11-1. After the presentation of positions by members of the public at the public hearing, and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, a recommendation from the City of Woodbury staff (zoning administrator, planning commission, and any city official (building official) that may have comments or recommendations, shall be heard by the city council. 
13.11-2. Following the staff recommendation, commission members may ask of anyone present questions pertinent to the issue. 
13.11-3. Following questions and/or comments by commission members, a motion for action on the issue will be in order. A majority of affirmative votes is required to pass any motion before the city council. 
13.11-4. So that the purpose of the [this] ordinance will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured, the commissioners are authorized the following action with respect to any motion pending before it consisting of one of the following: approval, approval with conditions, denial, withdrawal, or deferral to a time and date specified in minutes of meeting. No official action shall be taken until there is a majority vote of a quorum of the city council. 
Appeals from decisions of the city council shall be taken to the appropriate courts. 
Sec. 13.12. - Building Permit Required. 
13.12-1. No building or other structure shall be located, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit issued by the city clerk. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 13.13. - Application for Building Permit. 
13.13-1. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, setback distances, any parking spaces, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. 
Sec. 13.14. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
13.14-1. A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector, with approval from the zoning administrator is required in advance of the use or occupancy of: 
1.  Any lot or a change in the use thereof. 
2.  A building hereafter erected or altered or a change in the use of an existing building. 
3.  Any nonconforming use that is existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or an amendment thereto that is changed, extended, altered, or rebuilt thereafter. 
13.14-2. The certificate of occupancy shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
13.14-3. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or building or structure complies with all provisions of this ordinance. 
13.14-4. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
Sec. 13.15. - Conditional Zoning. 
13.15-1. In order to maintain the health, safety, welfare, and morality of the citizens of the City of Woodbury the city councilers may impose conditions on rezoning requests. Conditions placed on the property as a part of approval of a rezoning application shall remain in force until such time as an appeal has been granted. Conditions shall be in writing and purpose for the conditions shall be established. 
13.15-2. Conditions placed on property at the time of rezoning shall become a written part of the minutes of the city council meeting and shall be attached to the amendment to the official zoning map. The conditions imposed shall be part of the rezoning application and kept in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 13.16. - Appeal Process for Conditional Zoning. 
Appeals for relief of conditions placed on rezoned property may be heard by the City of Woodbury City Council only when the reason for the placement of conditions has been altered to allow the use of the property without the conditions. Appeals shall follow the same procedure as that of a rezoning application. Public hearings are required. 
Sec. 13.17. - Special Uses. 
13.17-1. The planning commission shall review and the City of Woodbury City Council shall approve or deny special uses which are specifically authorized by this ordinance. Public hearings are required (see hearing requirements). 
13.17-2. Conditions and limitations. The planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this ordinance in its review and the City of Woodbury City Council may impose conditions, requirements or limitations it deems necessary. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the zoning administrator or building official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, the permit shall be terminated. The applicant shall file an acceptance of conditions form, provided by the City of Woodbury, and the certificate shall be notarized. 
13.17-3. Procedure. Application for a special use shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator, and the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to consider each request and make written recommendations to the city council. A public hearing is required by the city council (see public hearing requirements). Upon receiving recommendations from the planning commission or after the 30-day period has expired, the city council shall schedule the proposed special use to be voted on at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General location of existing structures and property lines. 
b.  Present zoning of adjacent property. 
c.  Existing use of adjacent property. 
d.  Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
e.  A legal description of the property. 
f.  Setbacks. 
g.  Parking spaces if applicable. 
13.17-4. Specifically, in order to grant approval of a special use, the city council must find the following standards have been met: 
a.  The available existing street system is adequate to efficiently and safely accommodate the traffic which will be generated by the proposed use or development. 
b.  The existing public utilities, facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the proposed use or development. 
c.  The use or development will not generate or cause conditions such as noise, light, glare, odor or similar objectionable features which would reduce the value, use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
d.  The use would not have a detrimental environmental impact on the surrounding area. 
e.  The use would not adversely affect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. 
f.  Each application for a special use shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted in city hall set by the City of Woodbury [Planning] Commission to partially defray administrative and notification costs. 
Sec. 13.18. - Variances. 
13.18-1. A variance will be authorized upon appeal, in specific cases such variances from the terms of this zoning ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the zoning administrator and/or the planning commission that: 
1.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
2.  The application of the zoning ordinance to this particular piece of property would create unnecessary hardship; 
3.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
4.  Such conditions are not a result of any action of the property owner; 
5.  Relief, if granted, would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this zoning ordinance. 
13.18-2. Conditions and limitations. The planning commission shall include any condition, requirement, or limitation which may be necessary to protect adjacent properties and carry out the provisions of this ordinance. If at any time after a variance has been issued, the zoning administrator or building official finds that the conditions imposed and the agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a variance, the variance shall be terminated. 
13.18-3. Procedure. Applications for variance shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator, and the planning commission shall have 30 days within which to consider each request. A due process hearing is required by the planning commission. Each application shall be accompanied by a simple sketch of the site, showing the following: 
a.  General location of existing structures and property lines. 
b.  Present zoning of adjacent property. 
c.  Existing use of adjacent property. 
d.  Location of proposed buildings and land use. 
e.  A legal description of the property. 
f.  Setback distances. 
g.  Parking spaces if applicable. 
13.18-4. Procedures for Due Process Hearing. Procedures for hearing before the planning commission shall be: 
1.  The hearing shall be chaired by the chairman of the planning commission. 
2.  Evidence shall be produced by the applicant why the variance is necessary. 
3.  The building inspector/zoning administrator may be called upon to testify to the rules and regulations in the zoning ordinance. 
4.  The applicant and the planning commission has the right to question witnesses. 
5.  The final decision to grant an applicant a variance shall be made by the planning commission. Any appeals of the variance decision shall be taken to the proper courts. 
13.18-5. Fee. Each application for a variance shall be assessed a fee according to fee schedule posted at the office of the city clerk to defray administrative and notification costs. 
Sec. 13.19. - Penalties. 
13.19-1. Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished for each violation, according to the laws of the State of Georgia. Each day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
13.19-2. In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, lot, or acreage is used in violation of this ordinance, the city council, zoning administrator, or any other appropriate authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent said violation in the case of each such building or use. 
Sec. 13.20. - Compliance With Zoning Procedures Law. 
This article of the City of Woodbury Zoning Ordinance, as from time to time amended, is intended to set forth and constitute the policies, procedures and standards required under O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5, and copies of same shall be available to the public upon request. 