THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LAVONIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LAVONIA, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Ralph M. Owens 
Mayor 
____________ 
Donald Canady 
Kay McGlennen 
Eddie Floyd, Jr. 
Jason K. Macomson 
City Council 
____________ 
Gary M. Fesperman 
City Manager 
____________ 
John A. Dickerson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Angela V. Greer 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LAVONIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Ralph M. Owens 
Mayor 
____________ 
Donald Canady 
David Howell 
Eddie Floyd, Jr. 
Harold Harbin 
City Council 
____________ 
Gary M. Fesperman 
City Manager 
____________ 
Angela V. Greer 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and Sherry Allbritton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. John A. Dickerson, City Attorney, and Mr. Gary M. Fesperman, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lavonia, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 2005. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what legislation has been considered for codification in each supplement. Legislation that is of a general and permanent nature is codified in the Code and is considered "Included." Legislation that is not of a general and permanent nature is not codified in the Code and is considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Lavonia; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for administrative responsibilities; to provide for a city manager and certain duties and powers relative thereto; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, a city treasurer, and other personnel; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for severability; to repeal a specific Act; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 822), as adopted by the General Assembly, and approved on May 13, 2002. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Lavonia, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)	The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof to be retained permanently in the office of [the] Mayor and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the corporate limits of the City of Lavonia, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city manager shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)	This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)	The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section 1.13. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of this city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Air and Water Pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)	Animal Regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)	Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)	Building Regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)	Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and processions [professions]; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)	Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)	Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)	Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)	Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)	Garbage Fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)	General Health, Safety, and Welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)	Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)	Health and Sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)	Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail or to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)	Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)	Municipal Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)	Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)	Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)	Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)	Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including[,] but not limited to[,] a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, cable television, and any other public utility; to fix the penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same: to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)	Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)	Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)	Planning and Zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)	Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)	Public Hazards; Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)	Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)	Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)	Public Transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)	Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(30)	Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)	Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)	Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)	Sewer Fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to ensure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)	Solid Waste Disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)	Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit adult oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)	Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)	Taxes: Ad Valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)	Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(39)	Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)	Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)	Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into the execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.10. - City council creation, number, election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
Section 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless they shall be 21 years of age on or before the date of the election and shall have been a resident of the city for one year immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council. Each shall continue to reside therein during their period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)	Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, removal of residence from city, missing four consecutive city council meetings without leave from council, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
(b)	Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of [the] mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)	Conflict of Interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)	Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)	Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests, when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of their judgment or action in the performance of their official duties; 
(3)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which they are engaged without the proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of themselves or others; 
(4)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to their knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which they are engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign. Valuables are defined as gifts worth over $50.00; 
(5)	Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; and 
(6)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has financial interest. 
(b)	Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and they shall disqualify themselves from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)	Use of Public Property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)	Contracts Voidable and Rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city official. 
(e)	Ineligibility of Elected Official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which they were elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which they were elected. 
(f)	Political Activities of Certain Officers and Employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
(g)	Penalties for Violation. 
(1)	Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited their office or position. 
(2)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit their office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by the charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
Section 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, cable television systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable[,] educational, recreational, sport[,] curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city; and to regulate the use thereof and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Section 2.18. - Oath of office. 
The oath of office shall be administered by a person duly authorized by law to administer oaths to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)	The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting without unanimous consent of such councilmembers present. 
(c)	All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as required by law. 
Section 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)	The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)	All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the mayor's pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.21. - Quorum: voting. 
(a)	Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance or resolution. 
(b)	In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A unanimous vote of all members of the remaining council shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance or resolution. 
Section 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)	Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Lavonia hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and [may] be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided [sic] in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the city clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the city clerk and at such other places as the city council may designate. 
Section 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the councilmembers present shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Section 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)	The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)	The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)	A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter. 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Section 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)	The city clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)	The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as [the] "Code of Ordinances, City of Lavonia, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)	The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Editor's note— Compare the above section to O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Section 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council may employ a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the city manager's compensation. The city manager shall be employed solely on the basis of the city manager's executive and administrative qualifications. 
Section 2.28. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city, and the mayor shall be 21 years of age on or before the date of the election, and the mayor shall have been a resident of the city for one year immediately preceding the mayor's election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the mayor's office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Section 2.29. - Chief executive officer. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative power[s] granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
Section 2.30. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)	Vote at city council meetings only in the case of a tie vote by councilmembers;
(2)	See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed;
(3)	Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)	Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(5)	Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city and such other information as the city council may request from time to time; 
(6)	Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as they may deem expedient; 
(7)	Call special meetings of the city council as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2.19 of this charter; 
(8)	Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever they deem it expedient; and 
(9)	Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or by ordinance.
Section 2.31. - Mayor pro tempore, election. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. 
Section 2.32. - Mayor pro tempore, power and duties. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the heads of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)	All appointed officers and heads of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)	There shall be a head of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(e)	The power to employ or to discharge any employee of the city is vested in the city council. The city council may promulgate such policies as necessary for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the city and its employment practices. 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)	The city council shall create by ordinances such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasijudicial, or quasilegislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)	All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)	The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority created pursuant to subsection (c) of this section above shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)	Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)	No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)	Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the city clerk. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of the position as city attorney. The city attorney shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council may appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal; maintain council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by [the] city council. 
Section 3.14. - City treasurer. 
The city council may appoint a financial officer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes. The financial officer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. 
Section 3.15. - City accountant. 
The city council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. The city accountant shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
Section 3.16. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city council may provide for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Section 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
The city council may provide for and adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment;
(2)	The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)	Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and
(5)	Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Section 3.18. - Consolidation of functions. 
The city council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city treasurer, city manager, city tax collector, or of any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Lavonia. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)	The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless they shall have attained the age of 21 years. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)	Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance.
(d)	Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of a majority of the members present of the city council. 
(e)	Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such person will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of that office to the best of such person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction, powers. 
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $300.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)	The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $3,500.00 or imprisonment for 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by state law or local ordinance. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)	The municipal courts shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)	Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Franklin County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)	At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of said city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(b)	All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)	The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)	For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Lavonia shall consist of one election district with four numbered posts. Each person seeking election shall designate the post for which he or she seeks election. 
(e)	On the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November 2003, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and two councilmembers from Posts 3 and 4. Then, on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November 2005, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected two councilmembers from Posts 1 and 2. It is the purpose of this section to provide a rotation system for the office of mayor and councilmembers. The terms of the offices shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member. 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 5.13. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within three months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 5.14. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
Editor's note— The word "Municipal" should not be in the above section. 
Section 5.15. - Removal of officers. 
(a)	The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)	Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office;
(2)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(3)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)	Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter;
(5)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or
(6)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)	Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)	By the vote of a majority of councilmembers present after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Franklin County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)	By an order of the Superior Court of Franklin County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Lavonia. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage Rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council[,] by ordinance[,] shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council[,] by ordinance[,] shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council[,] by ordinance[,] may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety and welfare necessitates. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council[,] by ordinance[,] shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council[,] by ordinance[,] shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction, other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligations bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project[,] program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Section 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget[,] explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the mayor may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)	The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)	The city council[,] by ordinance[,] shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Section 6.26. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council[,] by ordinance[,] may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)	On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with the mayor's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. 
(b)	The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by the mayor's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Section 6.29. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)	It is in writing;
(2)	It is drawn by or submitted [sic] and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)	It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.21 of this charter. 
Section 6.31. - Sale of city property. 
(a)	The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)	The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)	Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 60 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)	Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)	The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive.
(c)	The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Section 7.16. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Lavonia in the County of Franklin, approved June 4, 1964 (1964 Ga. Laws, Ex. Sess., page 2008), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Section 7.17. - General Repealer. 
All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
Section 7.18. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in this Charter.

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Incorporation, art. I.
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Lavonia, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.010)
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.26. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The terms "the city" and "this city" shall be construed as if the term "of Lavonia" followed them. 
City council and council. Whenever the terms "city council" and "council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 
Code and this Code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are referred to without further qualification, they shall mean The Code of Ordinances, City of Lavonia, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean the County of Franklin. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. A term importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or and and. The term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, organizations, companies, firms, partnerships, trusts and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property defined in this section. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, any lake or stream, and any street, avenue or thoroughfare. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Title of officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. Whenever the title of an officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency is given, it shall be construed as though the phrase "of the City of Lavonia, Georgia" were added. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing, duplicating, handwriting or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.020)
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid because of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading to any chapter, article or division. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)	Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)	Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)	Any ordinance fixing salaries of city officers or employees;
(5)	Any appropriation ordinance;
(6)	Any right or franchise granted by the council to any person;
(7)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes for such improvements;
(10)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city;
(11)	Any ordinance relating to rezoning or amendments to a zoning map;
(12)	Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes or providing for the levying or collecting of ad valorem taxes; 
(13)	Any ordinance consistent with this Code establishing personnel policies and procedures or a retirement plan for the city employees, and amendments thereto; 
(14)	Any ordinance establishing or providing for participation in a regional development center or other intergovernmental body; 
(15)	Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for subject matters not included in this Code; or 
(16)	Any ordinance establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for utility services or connections or for any other purpose. 
(b)	All such actions and ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.030)
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.040)
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by their omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Lavonia, Georgia, that The Code of Ordinances, City of Lavonia, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________, which said section reads as follows:…. 
The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(d)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Lavonia, Georgia, that section ____________ of The Code of Ordinances, City of Lavonia, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…. 
The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.050)
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted in the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Official time. 
Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean eastern standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 1.04.060)
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or in any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of that provision of this Code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $3,500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not exceeding 90 days, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1.08.010) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Powers, art. I; government structure, art. II; administrative affairs, art. III.
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(3); any ordinance consistent with this Code establishing personnel policies and procedures or a retirement plan for the city employees, and amendments thereto saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(13); any ordinance establishing or providing for participation in a regional development center or other intergovernmental body saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(14); building department, § 22-31 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; elections, ch. 42; personnel, ch. 66; planning, ch. 70; administration and enforcement of subdivision regulations, § 82-201 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86; administration of hotel occupancy tax, § 86-69; utilities, ch. 98.
State Constitution reference—Home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II et seq.
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; municipal powers, duties and liabilities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-1 et seq.; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 42.
Sec. 2-30. - Compensation of mayor and members of city council. 
The annual compensation of the mayor as chief executive officer of the city will be $1,000.00 per month. The compensation of each member of the city council will be $400.00 per month. The compensation for called meetings will be $200.00 each per meeting attended for the mayor and city council members. No compensation shall be paid for work sessions. 
The compensation provided in this section will begin January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2003, § I; Ord. of 9-6-2005; Ord. of 6-3-2013(1), §§ I, II)
Sec. 2-31. - Ethics, principles and pledges. 
As a group of individuals, the city council subscribes to the following ethics, principles and pledges to conduct its affairs accordingly: 
(1)	Serve others, not ourselves.
(2)	Use resources with efficiency and economy.
(3)	Treat all people fairly.
(4)	Use the power of our position for the well-being of our constituents.
(5)	Create an environment of honesty, openness and integrity.
(Res. of 2-7-2000)
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 66. 
Sec. 2-32. - Dates and place of meeting. 
The city council will meet on the first Monday of each month at the city hall. 
(Code 1995, § 2.04.010)
Sec. 2-33. - Mayor to preside; special meetings. 
(a)	The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council.
(b)	Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 2.04.020)
Charter reference— Regular and special meetings, § 2.19. 
Sec. 2-34. - Adoption of ordinances and resolutions; form; attestation. 
(a)	All proposed ordinances, before they are voted upon by the city council, shall be read twice at separate meetings; however, the second reading may be waived and the ordinance passed at the first meeting, upon unanimous consent of the members of the city council. 
(b)	All proposed resolutions may be passed with one reading at the first meeting.
(c)	All adopted ordinances and resolutions shall be in writing, and shall be signed by the mayor or the officer presiding over the city council at the time of their passage, and attested to by the city clerk. 
(Code 1995, § 2.04.030)
Secs. 2-35—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing salaries of city officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(4); emergency management director, § 34-33.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Drug-free workplace. 
All city employees and councilmembers are required to take a drug test upon employment, appointment or election. 
(Code 1995, § 2.36.010)
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 66. 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, § 3.13.
Sec. 2-81. - Issuance of documents and executions. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue all summonses, orders, notices, licenses or other instruments of writing required of him by the judge of the municipal court or the council, and to receive all tax returns of real and personal property in the city, and to issue all fi. fas. required to be issued in the collection of taxes, fines and other sums due the city which shall bear teste in the name of the mayor. 
(Code 1995, § 2.08.010)
Sec. 2-82. - Attendance at city council meetings and municipal court. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attend the meetings of the city council and of the municipal court when required, and to keep an accurate record of the respective proceedings. 
(Code 1995, § 2.08.020)
Secs. 2-83—2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, ch. 66.
Sec. 2-101. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)	It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that its city officials be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the city officials. The city officials find that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of its members in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(b)	This division has the following purposes:
(1)	To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by the city officials.
(2)	To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city. 
(3)	To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in manners that affects the city. 
(4)	To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms.
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-1)
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City official and officials, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, city council, municipal court judges, city clerk, assistant city clerk and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as it may be amended from time to time. It also includes all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this division by the city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public. 
Substantial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity: 
(1)	The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity. 
(2)	Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or nonprofessional services. 
(3)	The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council. 
(4)	The person is a creditor, debtor or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property, which is an equitable or legal ownership with a fair market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-103. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person determined to be guilty of a violation of this division by the board of ethics is subject to one or all of the following penalties: 
(1)	Written or oral reprimand by the mayor and city council.
(2)	Request for resignation by the mayor and city council from the board, commission or committee of which the violator is a member. 
(3)	A fine determined by the mayor and city council, but not to exceed $500.00.
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-10)
Sec. 2-104. - Standards of conduct. 
No member of the city officials shall: 
(1)	Use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for such person or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official responsibilities. 
(2)	In any matter before the council, board or commission in which he has a substantial interest, fail to disclose for the common good for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote. 
(3)	Act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or any other board or commission. 
(4)	Directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, gratuity in any manner or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(5)	Enter into any contract with the city except as specifically authorized by state statutes. Any councilmember or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(6)	Use public funds for personal economic gain and not for the general welfare of the people. 
(7)	Dispose of public property not in accordance with state law.
(8)	Solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while still a city official or employee, if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair the judgment or performance of city duties. 
(9)	Use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for personal or private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(10)	Grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-3)
Sec. 2-105. - Conflict of interest. 
A city official or employee may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting a person, entity or property in which the official or employee has a substantial interest. Where the interest of a city official or employee in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official or employee may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-4)
Sec. 2-106. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not be construed to require the filing of any information relating to any city official's connection with, or interest in, any professional society, charitable, religious, social, fraternal, educational, recreational, public service, civil or political organization not conducted as a business enterprise or governmental agency, and which is not engaged in the ownership or conduct of a business enterprise or governmental agency. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-5)
Sec. 2-107. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any city official for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the city official. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon the receipt of a complaint, the mayor or, in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. If the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. If the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided in section 2-108. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-7)
Sec. 2-108. - Board of ethics. 
The board of ethics shall consist of five members, one appointed by the mayor, and one appointed by each of the four city councilmembers. All members shall be residents of the city and shall voluntarily serve a two-year term with no compensation. City officials shall appoint new board members as necessary in the event of a board member's resignation or death. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-8)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-131 et seq. 
Sec. 2-109. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The board of ethics, as appointed in section 2-108, shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable. Service shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 30 days after filing of the complaint. The accused official shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten days prior to the hearing, to be represented by council, to hear and examine evidence and witnesses, and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within three days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-9)
Sec. 2-110. - Appeals. 
An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2000(1), art. 1-1, § 1-1-11)
Secs. 2-111—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.11.
Cross reference— Board of ethics, § 2-108; council of emergency management, § 34-34; historic preservation commission, § 54-31 et seq.; planning and zoning board, § 70-31 et seq.
Sec. 2-131. - Persons eligible for appointment to boards. 
The appointment by the city of any person to any board or authority will be confined only to persons living within the corporate limits of Lavonia or persons owning or operating a business within the corporate limits of Lavonia, provided this section shall not apply to the eligibility of persons to boards, commissions, or authorities where eligibility requirements for appointment are otherwise provided by ordinance, state statute, federal statute, or other regulation. 
(Code 1995, § 2.32.010; Ord. of 5-3-2010(1), § I)
Secs. 2-132—2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, art. VI.
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(2); any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes or providing for the levying or collecting of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(12); any ordinance establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for utility services or connections or for any other purpose saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(16); excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, § 10-111 et seq.; occupation tax, § 26-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86; property taxes, § 86-31 et seq.; hotel occupancy tax, § 86-61 et seq.; tax levied on telephone companies, § 90-32; utility rates and charges, § 98-131 et seq.
Sec. 2-161. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the city shall begin on January 1 and shall end on December 31. 
Charter reference— Fiscal year, § 6.22. 
Sec. 2-162. - Receipt of fine moneys. 
(a)	Each person in the police department who takes any fine money will be responsible for transmitting the same to the front office. 
(b)	Front office personnel will prepare and give a receipt showing the fine moneys turned in. 
(c)	Each person receiving money on fines will be responsible for such money.
(Code 1995, § 2.36.040)
Secs. 2-163—2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERMIT FEES; UTILITY RATES; OTHER CHARGES 

Sec. 2-191. - Charges established. 
The purpose of this section is to establish permit fees, utility rates, and other charges for goods and services supplied or furnished by the city. The rates as established in this section may from time to time be amended by duly enacted resolutions of the city council. 
UTILITY RATES 
WATER/SEWER: 

 

 

 
BUILDING CODES: 
Building Permit Fees (established by the Southern Building Code) 

 
Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. 

 

 
There will be a $50.00 administrative fee charged for all deed changes in the city cemetery (Burgess Cemetery). 
OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT SERVICE FEES: 

 
A $200.00 fee/fire service call will be charged for all fire service provided. 
The annual registration fee for outside fire district service fees for industrial, manufacturing, commercial is deleted in its entirety and a uniform annual registration of $250.00 is establish for all outside fire district fire service for registered industrial, manufacturing, and commercial businesses. 
Fees based on current tax digest assessment values. 
A $250.00-per-hour-per-fire-truck rate will be charged for all fire service provided. 
Interstate 85 Fire Service Fees 
A $250.00-per-hour-per-fire-truck rate will be charged for all fire service provided within the Lavonia I-85 fire district. 

 
(Ord. of 6-2-2003, § I; Ord. of 8-2-2005, § I; Res. of 5-7-2007, §§1—5; Res. of 3-3-2008, § 1; Res. of 12-1-2008, § 1; Res. of 5-7-2012; Res. of 12-27-2012) 
Secs. 2-192—2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-221. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-222. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-223. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Lavonia. 
Covered account means: 
(1)	An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)	Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-224. - Findings. 
(a)	The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)	Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water accounts, sewer accounts, and garbage disposal accounts. 
(c)	The city has had no previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts.
(d)	The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)	The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)	The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)	Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account. 
(2)	Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name. 
(3)	Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts. 
(4)	Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-225. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)	As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer which shall be: (a) a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer; or (b) for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)	Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-226. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)	Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)	Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)	Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)	Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-227. - Credit card payments. 
(a)	In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)	All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer database. 
(c)	Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-228. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All	employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)	Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.	A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report;
b.	A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report;
c.	A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency;
d.	Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.	A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries;
2.	An unusual number of recently established credit relationships;
3.	A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.	An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)	Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include:
a.	Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged;
b.	Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.	Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.	An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)	Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.	Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.	The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or
2.	The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.	Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.	Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.	Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.	The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers.
f.	The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.	The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.	Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.	The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)	Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.	Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.	A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.	The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.	An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.	Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments;
2.	A material change in purchasing or spending patterns;
d.	An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors); 
e.	Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.	The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements.
g.	The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.	The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)	Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-229. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)	Contact the customer;
(2)	Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.	Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.	Close the account;
(3)	Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)	Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)	Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(b)	In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the manager, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)	Request additional identifying information from the applicant;
(2)	Deny the application for the new account;
(3)	Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or
(4)	Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft.
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-230. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)	The city's experiences with identity theft;
(2)	Updates in methods of identity theft;
(3)	Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, arid mitigate identity theft;
(4)	Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and
(5)	Updates in service provider arrangements.
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 2-231. - Program administration. 
The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)	The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.	The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.	Service provider arrangements;
c.	Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and
d.	Recommendations for material changes to the program.
(2)	The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Sec. 3-232. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 1)
Secs. 2-233—2-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 2-261. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the treatment of address discrepancies ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Sec. 2-262. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Sec. 2-263. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Lavonia. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Sec. 2-264. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)	Compare the information in the consumer report with:
a.	Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.	Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.	Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)	Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer.
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Sec. 2-265. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)	In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)	The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)	The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and
(3)	The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)	Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Sec. 2-266. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Verifying the address with the consumer;
(2)	Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address;
(3)	Verifying the address through third party sources; or
(4)	Using other reasonable processes.
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 2)
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulation of roadside areas, § 1.13(30).
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.
State Law reference— False advertising, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-420 et seq.; misrepresenting ownership in advertising liquidation, auction or going out of business sale prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-425; unauthorized signs on public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; outdoor advertising, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Distribution of advertising materials. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to throw, cast or distribute, or cause or permit to be thrown, cast or distributed, any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising matter whatsoever in or upon any street or public place, or in a front yard, or on any stoop or in the vestibule or any hall of any building or any letter box therein within the city; however, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the United States Postal Service, or prohibit the distribution of sample copies of newspapers regularly sold by the copy or by annual subscription and this section shall not be deemed to prevent the lawful distribution of anything other than commercial and business advertising matter. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to post any bills or other advertisement matter upon any permanent or temporary structure or public building, pole or tree located in the city, or a park or other public way or place. 
(c)	It is unlawful for any person to distribute in the city any handbills or any similar form of advertisement by throwing or placing it in any automobile or other vehicle within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.08.020)
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIGNS 

Sec. 6-31. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	The mayor and council are enacting this article to ensure that noncommercial messages are authorized with restriction only as to the size of such signage and to establish reasonable regulations for signage containing commercial messages. The mayor and council find that signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. 
(b)	By enacting this article, the mayor and council intend to:
(1)	Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)	Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan;
(3)	Protect the public health, safety, and welfare;
(4)	Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards;
(5)	Maintain the historical image of the city;
(6)	Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(7)	Promote economic development; and
(8)	Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 1)
Sec. 6-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors which requires electrical energy. This definition does not include signs which indicate time, temperature, or date. 
Area of a sign and sign area mean the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
Awning sign means a sign located on a rooflike cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
Banner means a sign designed to advertise a special event or promotion, made of paper, cloth, other fabric or nondurable material, and not designed to be permanent. Banner signs are nonilluminated. 
Campaign sign means a sign promoting candidates for public office or signs in support of or in opposition to a lawful referendum or election. 
Corner sign means a sign attached to building corners or other permanent fixtures which extends at an angle from the corner or permanent fixture. 
Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back-to-back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a steel support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Monument sign means a freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Mural sign means a sign of historical significance on walls of buildings. Mural signs are not intended to be included in this article, except that all mural signs in the historical district must be approved by the Lavonia Historic Preservation Commission. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
Portable sign means a sign, except as otherwise described in this section, that is not designed to be permanently affixed to any structure. A portable sign is designed to be moved from location to location and may or may not be illuminated. 
Real estate sign means a sign with a maximum area of five square feet, used to advertise the sale or rental of real estate. 
Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building, which extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building. 
Sidewalk sign means a sign on an A-frame or platform with a maximum height of three feet and a maximum width of two feet. These are portable signs, and all sidewalk signs must be removed at the end of each business day. 
Sign means a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
Stanchion sign means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
Temporary sign means a sign announcing a location or relocation of a business or a sign advertising financing or construction of a new or remodeled facility or a sign announcing a special event such as for charitable or public purposes (e.g., youth car wash). 
Wall sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
Window lettering means a sign on the window of businesses, not exceeding 30 percent of the window area. 
Yard sale sign means a sign not to exceed five square feet, advertising a yard sale. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 2)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-33. - Permits—Required. 
(a)	Except as specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. 
(b)	Except for billboard signs, permits are not required for campaign signs.
(c)	Permits are not required for banners, temporary signs or real estate signs.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 3)
Sec. 6-34. - Same—Application. 
(a)	Application for sign permits required in section 6-33(a) shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the office of the zoning director upon forms furnished by such office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this article.
(2)	The value of the sign.
(3)	The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located and the proposed location of the subject sign on the subject property. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the zoning director shall be used. 
(4)	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)	The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)	The consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign. 
(7)	The name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor.
(b)	All applicants for electrical signs must obtain an electrical permit.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 4)
Sec. 6-35. - Same—Expiration date. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord of 5-5-2003(1), § 5)
Sec. 6-36. - Same—Fees. 
(a)	No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the zoning director and fees have been paid as provided in this section. 
(b)	Except as provided in this section, there will be a base fee of $50.00, plus $2.00 per square foot. 
(c)	There shall be no charge for yard sale signs, temporary signs, real estate signs, non-billboard campaign signs, and banners. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 6)
Sec. 6-37. - Prior illegal signs. 
Signs which were illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances; signs made of paper, cloth, or nondurable materials; signs located within a public right-of-way; and signs prohibited by this article shall be removed by the owner within 90 days from May 5, 2003. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this article, the zoning director or his designee may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 7)
Sec. 6-38. - Time for consideration. 
The city clerk shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, the notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30-business day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 8)
Sec. 6-39. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)	Procedure. The city council shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, incomplete applications or applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the clerk shall revoke the permit. Should the city council deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as defined in this section, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city. The applicant will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this article, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)	Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council, provided that he files written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the hearing officer's decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of two full business days before the meeting. 
(c)	Legal review. If an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 9)
Sec. 6-40. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)	Animated signs;
(2)	Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs;
(3)	Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area.
(4)	Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(5)	Portable signs;
(6)	Except for yard sale signs or temporary signs advertising a special event for charitable or public purposes, signs that are not professionally printed; 
(7)	Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign. 
(8)	Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound.
(9)	Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(10)	Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curb, utility pole, or other structure except as set forth in this article. 
(11)	Signs which advertise any activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States or the state or by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. 
(12)	Corner signs.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 10)
Sec. 6-41. - Specific restrictions in historical district. 
All signs except yard sale signs which require permits and are located in the historical district must also be approved by Lavonia Historic Preservation Commission style and lettering consistent with historical charities. The following signs are allowed in the historical district: 
(1)	Monument signs.
(2)	Wall and awning signs.
(3)	Alley signs.
(4)	Sidewalk signs.
(5)	Window signs.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 11)
Sec. 6-42. - I-85 corridor. 
All signs located on sites abutting the Interstate 85 right-of-way or any sign visible from the Interstate 85 right-of-way shall conform with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. as they exist or as amended, and these code sections (O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-70—32-6-97) are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 12)
Sec. 6-43. - Shopping centers. 
(a)	Shopping centers are defined as areas with common entrances and exits containing commercial and/or retail businesses and may include adjoining buildings with common walls and separate buildings or separate buildings or groups of buildings in an office park. 
(b)	Only one stanchion sign and no more than one monument sign will be allowed in a shopping center. 
(c)	Billboard signs are not allowed in shopping centers.
(d)	Except as specifically provided in this section, all other signs otherwise allowable are allowable in shopping centers. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 13)
Sec. 6-44. - Corridors. 
(a)	Corridor signs are all signs located on highways or rights-of-way other than in the I-85 corridor, shopping centers, and historic district as described in this article. 
(b)	Signs allowed in corridors are:
(1)	Awning signs;
(2)	Banners;
(3)	Billboard signs;
(4)	Monument signs;
(5)	Real estate signs;
(6)	Roof signs;
(7)	Stanchion signs;
(8)	Temporary signs;
(9)	Wall and awning signs;
(10)	Window signs;
(11)	Yard sale signs.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 14)
Sec. 6-45. - Height requirements. 
The following height requirements shall be adhered to: 
(1)	Except as provided in section 6-42 (I-85 corridor), no sign in a commercial or industrial zoned district shall exceed 25 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)	Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height.
(3)	All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the adjacent street to which the property on which the sign is located has access. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 15)
Sec. 6-46. - General size, location and other requirements. 
(a)	Commercial signs. No sign of a commercial or business nature which advertises, sponsors, promotes or directs attention to a product, service, profession, property, business, event, institution, activity or entertainment which is not offered, sold, produced, manufactured, conducted, or engaged in on the property upon which the sign is located shall be allowed. 
(b)	Consent. No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Billboard signs. 
(1)	Billboard signs shall not exceed 50 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed eight feet in height or eight feet in length. 
(2)	Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(3)	Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways. 
(4)	No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of another billboard sign.
(5)	No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of residential zoned parcels.
(6)	No billboard sign shall be located within 500 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within 500 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 500-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery. 
(d)	Stanchion signs. 
(1)	Stanchion signs shall not exceed a sign area of 50 square feet with a maximum height of 15 feet. 
(2)	Stanchion signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(e)	Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure. 
(f)	Wall and awning signs. 
(1)	Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. Signs under awnings are allowed as signs attached or affixed to awnings. Under-awning signs will not exceed: 
a.	Two square feet in total area;
b.	Twelve inches in height; and
c.	Three feet in width.
(2)	Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)	Wall and awning signs shall not exceed a sign area of 100 square feet or five percent of the wall face, whichever is less, on each street-facing wall. 
(4)	The maximum wall or awning sign height shall be five feet.
(5)	Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas.
(6)	Each building tenant shall be limited to one wall or awning sign on each street-facing wall. 
(g)	Alley signs. Signs in the alleys of the city are allowed on the doors, walls, and sides of buildings and must identify the business. Alley signs will not exceed 12 square feet. 
(h)	Maximum aggregate sign area. Parcels may contain more than one sign, provided that: 
(1)	Parcels exceeding three acres shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 300 square feet. 
(2)	Parcels less than three acres but greater than 30,000 square feet shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 180 square feet. 
(3)	Parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area for the entire parcel of 50 square feet. 
(4)	These limits shall not include the area of any wall signs or billboard signs located on the parcel. 
(5)	These limits shall include the area of all freestanding signs on the parcel.
(i)	Number of real estate signs. No more than four real estate signs will be located at the entrance to any subdivision. 
(j)	Yard sale signs. No more than two yard sale signs advertising a yard sale at a particular address shall be granted each calendar year. The yard sale sign must contain the name, address and phone number of the permittee. Yard sale signs are permitted only the day before the sale and must be removed at the end of the day of the sale. 
(k)	Temporary signs. Temporary signs announcing a relocation or new business will be posted only for a period of 30 days. Other temporary signs are allowed only for the duration of the project or event. 
(l)	Banner signs. Banner signs are allowed only 20 days. 
(m)	Removal of real estate signs. Real estate signs must be removed within three business days of closing. 
(n)	Campaign signs. Campaign signs must be removed three business days following the election or runoff. 
(o)	Roof signs. Only one roof sign per building is allowed except in shopping centers, where one roof sign per business will be allowed. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 16)
Sec. 6-47. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Nonconforming signs that met all legal requirements when erected may stay in place, provided that within 90 days of May 5, 2003, the owner of the nonconforming sign or his designee registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in section 6-34 and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before May 5, 2003. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)	The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly;
(2)	The sign has been damaged to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign - 60 percent of replacement value. 
(3)	Ninety days have expired from May 5, 2003, without the sign being registered.
(c)	A nonconforming sign may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign.
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 17)
Sec. 6-48. - Variances. 
Where a literal application of the terms of this article, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted where all the following conditions exist: 
(1)	Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area. 
(2)	The applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)	Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)	The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant.
(5)	The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)	Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 18)
Sec. 6-49. - Exemptions. 
(a)	Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including but not limited to public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Temporary signs erected by the city to advertise special events within the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 19)
Sec. 6-50. - Illumination. 
Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 20)
Sec. 6-51. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	All signs shall be maintained in good condition as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give the permittee ten days to rectify the condition or remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation. 
(b)	The city may issue a citation for violation of this article for any sign erected, altered, converted, or used in violation of this article. 
(c)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 and not more than $150.00 for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(1), § 21) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Special areas of public regulation, § 1.13(35).
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; malt beverage and wine licenses; liquor or distilled spirits licenses, § 26-160.
State Law reference— Local licensing of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local licensing of malt beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local licensing of wine sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, etc., jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, etc., O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(2) and includes malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
Dancehall or entertainment center where alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises means any business licensed and open to the public on a regular basis as a dancehall, entertainment center or social club which offers for its regular patrons alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, and for which a license must be obtained for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
Distilled spirits means as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(8) and includes any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Election day means one hour before the polls open to one hour after the polls close. 
Malt beverage means as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(13) and includes fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverage which contains no more than six percent of alcohol by volume. 
Minor means an underage person under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Open bar means any business or establishment which derives more than 70 percent of its annual gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Package means as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(16) to include a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Posts, chapters and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations means those which in the case of veteran organizations are recognized as representatives of veterans by the Veterans Administration, and as to fraternal organizations, have charters from Elks, Moose or similar organizations and which have complied with section 501(A) of the United States Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(a)) for a tax exempt status. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license; except that in the case of hotels and motels, the term "premises" shall include only the portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold. The term "premises" is further defined as one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room, or two or more contiguous rooms, operating under the same trade name where alcoholic beverages are sold. Any premises outlet which cannot be determined as one identifiable place of business shall require additional licenses regardless of such establishment having the same trade name, ownership or management. 
Private club means an organization complying with section 501(A) of the United States Internal Revenue Code (26 USC 501(a)) for a tax exempt status. The club must have been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this article; it must have at least 75 regular dues-paying members; it must own, hire or lease a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment as is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; and it must have no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary of other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Residence means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioning, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecoration, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the service of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 75 seats for customers. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-1))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-32. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 and shall also subject the holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter to suspension or revocation of such license in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)	The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a holder of any alcoholic beverages license shall be subject to the following punishment: 
(1)	First violation. A minimum fine of $500.00 and license suspension to be probated. 
(2)	Second violation. A minimum fine of $1,000.00 and minimum license suspension of 30 days. 
(3)	Third violation. A minimum fine of $1,500.00 and license revocation of 60 days. 
(4)	Fourth violation. A minimum fine of $2,000.00 and permanent license suspension. 
For the purposes of determining violation history, the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue will be utilized. 
(c)	The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in lieu of other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-2); Ord. of 4-7-2003, § I)
Sec. 10-33. - Prohibited activities. 
No holder of a license issued under this article, nor any agent or employee of the licensee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Knowingly furnish or cause to be furnished or permit any other person in his employ to furnish to any minor alcoholic beverages of any kind. 
(2)	Employ minors on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a minor in his employment to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages; however, the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit minors who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption on the premises. 
(3)	Knowingly sell alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an intoxicated condition. 
(4)	Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day, or at any time, when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(5)	Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practice on the licensed premises. Such misconduct shall be immediately reported to the city police department. 
(6)	Sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines.
(7)	Receive or cause to be delivered at the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by any means other than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the city to make such deliveries. Transportation of alcoholic beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of all licenses concerned. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-23))
Sec. 10-34. - Hours, days of operation. 
(a)	The hours of sale of alcoholic beverages are as follows:
(1)	Retail sales not for consumption on premises, 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, except where contrary to state regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)	Consumption on the premises, 8:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, except where contrary to state regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)	No alcoholic beverages shall be sold on Sundays or Christmas Day.
(c)	The sale of alcoholic beverages at any other time is prohibited.
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-24))
Sec. 10-35. - Food sales by consumption on the premises licensees. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided all consumption on the premises license holders in the city shall maintain at least 60 percent of the immediate preceding 12-month gross income in the restaurant from the sale of food. Accounting records verified by the license holder as accurate shall be available for inspection by the city on a quarterly basis. Additionally, and except as otherwise provided, all consumption on the premises license holders as defined in this chapter shall maintain at least 75 seats for customers and shall be a dance hall or entertainment center where alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises; a post-chapter entity of a nationally charted veterans and fraternal organizations; a private club, or a restaurant as defined in this chapter. 
The city may examine the records of the premises license under this subsection at any reasonable time to ascertain and verify that the requirements of this section and other provisions of the alcoholic beverages ordinance of the city are being met. 
(b)	Within 120 days after having been issued a consumption on the premises license, the licensee shall submit to the city a statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section have been met for the first 90 days after the applicant received the license for on the premises consumption. Thereafter at the time of license renewal, each consumption on the premises license holder shall submit to the city an annual statement from a certified public accountant or a registered public accountant that the income requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section have been met. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-25); Ord. of 12-16-2002, § I; Ord. of 6-6-2011, § I)
Sec. 10-36. - Failure to furnish required report. 
Upon failure of any person selling alcoholic beverages to furnish promptly to the city when due any report required by the ordinances of the city or to pay any tax due the city for the sale of such commodities, there shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due or that shown due by any such report. The penalty shall be in addition to any such tax. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-26))
Sec. 10-37. - Storage. 
All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which a license required by this article is issued. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-27))
Sec. 10-38. - Sunday business. 
All licensees under this article who open their place of business on Sunday for the sale of merchandise other than alcoholic beverages shall cover alcoholic beverages within the view of the public so that the alcoholic beverages cannot be seen on Sunday. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-28))
Sec. 10-39. - False representation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever, in violation of this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-29))
Sec. 10-40. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-30))
Sec. 10-41. - Inspection. 
Premises operated under the provisions of this article shall be open to inspection by authorized personnel of the city at all times. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-31))
Sec. 10-42. - Happy hour. 
There will be no designated hours advertised as happy hour allowed in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-32))
Sec. 10-43. - Open alcoholic beverages; open bars. 
(a)	Open containers of alcohol. 
(1)	Opened alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed in public access areas in the city.
(2)	Public access areas as used herein is defined to include all city parking places, all public property owned by the city, any private property owned and patrolled by the city pursuant to an agreement with the city and the private owner, all public parks, all public recreational facilities, and all public sidewalks. 
(3)	An opened alcoholic beverage as used herein is defined as any alcoholic beverage in which the seal is broken or cap removed or which is open to be accessible for consumption, to include alcoholic beverages poured in cups, containers, glasses, mugs, steins, or any other open alcoholic beverage. 
(4)	A violation of this section is punishable as provided by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lavonia. 
(b)	Open bars. There shall be no license issued under this article for an open bar in the city. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-33); Ord. of 7-5-2005(1), § I)
Sec. 10-44. - Reporting and acting on violations. 
(a)	Any violation of this article that may warrant revocation of a license issued under this article shall be reported by any person to the city which shall have the power in its discretion to suspend the license or permit for a period of not to exceed ten days pending a hearing before the city council on the question of whether or not the license or permit shall be revoked for cause, in compliance with this article. 
(b)	Upon a charge that there has been a violation of this article, the clerk is authorized to order the place of business charged closed, pending a hearing on the charge. 
(c)	The chief of police, or any police department shift commander on duty at the time, shall have the authority to close any location holding a license issued under this article for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, welfare, safety or morals, when in the judgment of the chief of police, or such shift commander, such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(d)	The city council shall have the right to suspend any alcoholic beverage license pending the hearing provided for in this section where, in the judgment of the city council, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-3))
Sec. 10-45. - Exception. 
(a)	The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to a hotel or motel not required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter holding an event for business development purposes at which malt beverages or wine are served, without charge, for guests of the hotel or motel. 
(b)	Provided the exception described in subsection (a) is subject to the following limitations:
(1)	There is a four-hour per day limitation on business development events;
(2)	There will be no alcoholic beverages served for business development on Sunday;
(3)	All alcoholic beverages served for business development must be purchased from a duly licensed alcoholic beverage licensee doing business in the City of Lavonia; and 
(4)	There shall be imposed on the hotel or motel an annual license fee of $100.00 per year or any part of a year and the license shall be for only a calendar year (January 1—December 31). 
(Ord. of 2-2-2009, § I)
Secs. 10-46—10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.
Sec. 10-71. - Classification of licenses. 
Alcoholic beverage licenses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)	Malt beverages, package.
(2)	Wine, package.
(3)	Distilled spirits, package.
(4)	Malt beverages, consumption on the premises.
(5)	Wine, consumption on the premises.
(6)	Distilled spirits, consumption on the premises.
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-4))
Sec. 10-72. - License declared privilege. 
Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city is a privilege, and not a right, and the issuance of a license under this division shall not create any property rights in the license holder. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-5))
Sec. 10-73. - Application for license; disclosure of interest. 
(a)	All applications for a license under this division shall be in the name of the owner of the business seeking the application. If the owner is a corporation, partnership or association, the application shall also contain the names of all officers, partners or associates who own any interest in the business, and the name of the principle resident managing officer and registered agent. The application shall show that the license is for the use of the owner and the owner shall be named. If the owner of the premises is someone other than the applicant, the name of the owner of the premises shall be listed and the applicant shall show proof that the owner of the premises has been given notice of the applicant's intent to apply for an alcoholic beverage license. 
(b)	No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverages licensee in the city unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished to the city council at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the council, within five days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Any division of the profits.
(2)	Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever.
(3)	Any change in the payment of rents or leases.
(4)	Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business.
(5)	Any change in the ownership of any corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation. 
(c)	After receipt of the notice referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the council shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, and it shall then be incumbent upon such person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice to do so by the council to such person at his address as shown on such notice of interest. If such interest is not disposed of within 30 days after the mailing of the notice by the council, or if no objections are filed within such 30-day period, or if such person fails to notify the council of the transfer or any such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, then the license as provided for in this division may be revoked by the council until disposition of the interest has been made or notice given to the council of the transfer. 
(d)	The report required by this section shall be in the form required by the council. It shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application, which is on file with the council and, as such, shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(e)	Whenever there is any application for an alcoholic beverage license, which application is the initial application following a suspension or revocation of a previously held alcoholic beverage license, the city shall call for a notice to be published describing the name of the applicant, the location of the business premises, and giving the time and date when the application will be considered. This notice must be published at least seven days prior to the application being considered. This notice does not pertain to the annual renewal of licenses previously granted by the city council. The license applicant shall be required to pay to the city the current sum as the cost of publication. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-6))
Sec. 10-74. - Application contents and terms. 
(a)	All applications for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages shall be made in person by the applicant, and in writing on forms furnished by the city, signed by the applicant in compliance with this division and shall contain, but not be restricted to, the following statements and information: 
(1)	The name, age, address and length of residency of the applicant.
(2)	The name, location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(3)	A statement of whether the applicant, or any person with an interest in the application, has made application at any previous time for any distilled spirits, malt beverage or wine license and the disposition of such application. 
(4)	Whether the applicant, or any person with an interest in the application, has ever been convicted of a crime other than for misdemeanor traffic violations. 
(5)	Whether a previous license issued to the applicant, or to any person with an interest in the application, has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government and the reason therefor. 
(6)	Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses, or both, of the proposed business. 
(b)	All new applications for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be accompanied by a check or cashier's check, payable to the city, for the proper amount of the license fee. If the license is refused, such fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(c)	All applications for the renewal of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be filed with the city prior to November 15. Payment of license fees for the renewal of licenses may be made at the time of application or by December 31 and, upon approval of renewal and payment, a license will be issued. 
(d)	The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for a license shall be sufficient cause for the refusal, suspension, revocation or cancellation of such license, as the city council shall deem proper. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-7))
Sec. 10-75. - Minimum age of applicant. 
Every applicant for a city alcoholic beverage license shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-8))
Sec. 10-76. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt by the city of any application for an alcoholic beverage license or for the transfer of any license, the chief of police shall investigate, and shall attach thereto, the entire police record of every person named in such application. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-9))
Sec. 10-77. - Fingerprinting. 
Every applicant for a license under this division, or for a transfer of such license, shall be fingerprinted by the police department of the city before such license is issued pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-10))
Sec. 10-78. - Statement of employees. 
The city council may, in its discretion, require a personal statement of any employee of any licensed establishment for the licensing purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-11))
Sec. 10-79. - License fees. 
(a)	The applicant for a malt beverages package license shall pay to the city clerk, at the time his application is submitted, the sum referred to in section 2-191 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. 
(b)	At the time his application is submitted, the applicant for an on the premises malt beverages consumption license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the clerk the sum referred to in section 2-191 as an annual license fee for the sale of malt beverages, when such sales are by the drink. Malt beverages may be sold in posts, chapters and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations for such annual fee. 
(c)	At the time his application is submitted, the applicant for a wine package license shall pay to the clerk of the city, as an annual license fee, the sum referred to in section 2-191 for operation for one year at one location or business where the products will be sold. 
(d)	At the time his application is submitted, the applicant for an on the premises wine consumption license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the clerk the sum referred to in section 2-191 as an annual license fee for the sale of wine, when such sales are by the drink. Wine may be sold in posts, chapters and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations for such fee. 
(e)	The applicant for a distilled spirits package license shall pay to the clerk of the city, at the time his application is submitted, the sum referred to in section 2-191 as an annual license fee for operation for one year at one location or business where the products are sold. 
(f)	At the time his application is submitted, the applicant for a distilled spirits consumption license shall, in addition to all other fees, pay to the clerk the sum referred to in section 2-191 for an annual license fee for the sale of distilled spirits when such sales are by the drink. Distilled spirits may be sold in posts, chapters and clubs of nationally chartered veterans and fraternal organizations for a fee referred to in section 2-191. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-12))
Sec. 10-80. - Proration of fee. 
An applicant for any license under this division who makes application at any time after January 1 and before July 1 shall pay the full annual license fee. An applicant for any license under this division who makes application on or after July 1 shall pay half the annual license fee. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-13))
Sec. 10-81. - Performance bond. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in this division, all persons obtaining a distilled spirits package license or a license for the consumption of distilled spirits on the premises shall post a performance bond in the amount of their total annual license fee for distilled spirits to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-14))
Sec. 10-82. - Duration and renewal. 
The city license issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next calendar year must make a renewal application, on such forms as prescribed by the city, for such year on or before November 15 of the preceding year. The payment of license fees for renewal of licenses may be made at the time of application or by December 31 and the license will be issued upon approval or renewal by the council and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-15))
Sec. 10-83. - Limitation on issuance; fees nonrefundable. 
No license required by this division shall be issued for less than one calendar year, or remainder thereof, subject to the provisions of section 10-82, and, in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-16))
Sec. 10-84. - Termination of business. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be valid only so long as the premises is actively engaged in such business, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecoration. If the licensee shall cease to be actively engaged in such business, the license shall be invalid and the licensee of such business shall immediately notify the city council and return his license thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-17))
Sec. 10-85. - Transfer. 
(a)	No city license issued under this division may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without permission and approval of the city council upon written application made. 
(b)	Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other location must make a complete new application for such new business. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-18))
Sec. 10-86. - Denial of license. 
(a)	Where contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the city council for: 
(1)	Any person, as determined by the city council by reason of his business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)	Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude. 
(3)	Any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)	A location that, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, is not suitable because of traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties, or on the neighborhood. 
(5)	A location within an area where, in the judgment of the city council, the number of alcoholic beverages licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest or welfare. 
(6)	A location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the city Code or any state or federal law or regulation. 
(7)	A location at which a previous alcoholic beverages license has been revoked or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from operation of such a license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(8)	Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations.
(b)	No person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity which operates a sexually oriented business as defined under chapter 26, article IV, or which is subject to or licensed under chapter 26, article IV, shall, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, sell, distribute, serve or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine or controlled substance upon the premises of any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-19))
Sec. 10-87. - Grounds for suspension and/or revocation. 
The following shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license: 
(1)	The violation by the license holder or his employee of any state or federal law or regulation, except misdemeanors or any ordinance of the city, other than misdemeanor traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)	The failure of the license holder or his employee to promptly report to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(3)	Any conduct on the part of the license holder or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)	Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)	The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-20))
Sec. 10-88. - Notice of denial, suspension or revocation; hearing. 
Before the city council shall deny any application for a license required by this division, or for the transfer of any such license, or shall suspend or revoke any existing license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given written notice from the city to show cause before the city council at a place and time specified therein which shall not be less than three days nor more than ten days of service of the notice, why such application for license or for transfer license should be denied, or why such license should not be suspended or revoked, and stating the grounds therefor. At the appointed time and place, the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exist, why such application should not be denied or such license suspended or revoked. At the show cause hearing, the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence, to cross examine witnesses, to retain counsel, and such other due process rights as may be afforded under applicable state or federal law. After the conclusion of the show cause hearing, the city council shall inform the applicant in writing of its decision on the application within ten days. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-21))
Sec. 10-89. - Products offered for sale restricted. 
No retail dealer who has a license for the package sale of distilled spirits shall sell or offer for sale or display or keep in stock at his place of business where distilled spirits are offered for sale any other product of commodity except the following: 
(1)	Wines, only if the retail dealer holds a valid and current license to sell wine at such place of business. 
(2)	Malt beverages or beer, only if the retail dealer holds a valid and current license to sell malt beverages or beer at such place of business. 
(3)	Tobacco products.
(4)	Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits.
(5)	Ice sold in sealed containers only.
(6)	Paper, styrofoam or plastic cups.
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-22))
Secs. 10-90—10-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXCISE TAXES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-161 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86.
Sec. 10-111. - Rate of taxation—Malt beverages. 
In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required in this article, there is levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax on malt beverages so sold, as follows: 
(1)	Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, such excise tax shall be computed at the rate of $0.004166 per ounce. 
(2)	All malt beverages, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (1) of this section, but there is imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the city an excise tax of $6.00, for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-34))
Sec. 10-112. - Same—Wine. 
In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required in this article, there is levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per wine liter, which shall be paid to the city on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the city. Such tax shall be prorated on miniatures, half pints, pints, fifths, half gallons and other quantities and on wine gallons so that each bottle shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per wine liter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-35))
Sec. 10-113. - Same—Distilled spirits by the drink. 
There is levied and imposed an excise tax upon the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge for the beverage to the public. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-36))
Sec. 10-114. - Same—Package sale of distilled spirits. 
There is levied and imposed an excise tax on all package sales of distilled spirits in the amount of $0.22 per liter. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-37))
Sec. 10-115. - Method of payment. 
The tax levied by this division shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all beverages coming under this article sold within the city by each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages or wine to a retailer in the city, who shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all such deliveries on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-38))
Sec. 10-116. - Payment of tax; report. 
The summary report made by each wholesale dealer to the city shall show the exact quantities of taxed beverages, by size and type of container and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-39))
Sec. 10-117. - Right of audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit and to require the production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-40))
Sec. 10-118. - Failure to make timely report; penalty. 
(a)	The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of five percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period, or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)	Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-41))
Sec. 10-119. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any beverage taxed by this division on which the required tax has not been paid to the wholesaler or distributor or the city. 
(Ord. of 3-5-2002, § 1(1-42))
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Special areas of public regulation, § 1.13(35).
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.
State Law reference— Standard Amusement Device Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-20, 8-2-25; Sunday motion picture shows and athletic events, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-550 et seq.; replays on coin-operated devices, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35; bingo, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-50 et seq.; Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; Carnival Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-13-1 et seq.; operators of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; public dancehalls, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-50 et seq.; application of dancehall law within municipal limits, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-58.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arcade means a location where more than three noncash redemption machines as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) or 16-12-35(d) are operated. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine includes coin-operated amusement machines and means: 
(1)	Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment the operation of which requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object and the result of which the operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b)—(g), and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.	Pinball machines;
b.	Console machines;
c.	Video games;
d.	Crane machines;
e.	Claw machines;
f.	Pusher machines;
g.	Bowling machines;
h.	Novelty arcade games;
i.	Foosball or table soccer machines;
j.	Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines;
k.	Target or shooting gallery machines;
l.	Basketball machines;
m.	Shuffleboard games;
n.	Kiddie ride games;
o.	Skeeball machines;
p.	Air hockey machines;
q.	Roll down machines;
r.	Trivia machines;
s.	Laser games;
t.	Simulator games;
u.	Virtual reality machines;
v.	Matchup or lineup games which require the player to use skill stops to complete the game; 
w.	Maze games;
x.	Racing games;
y.	Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
z.	Any other similar amusement machine, which can be legally operated in the state.
(2)	Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music the operation of which requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
License means a license issued by the city to operate an arcade. 
Location means a separate building. 
Registrant means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity who, as the owner, lessee or beneficiary has under his or its control any location, establishment, place or premises in or at which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)	Violation of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor local ordinance violation and shall include one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)	A monetary fine up to a maximum of $1,000.00.
(2)	Maximum imprisonment of 60 days.
(3)	Suspension or revocation of the registrant's arcade license and any other county licenses held by the registrant, including, but not limited to, licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)	Revocation of machine registration and prohibition of machine operation at any location which does not require an arcade license. 
(b)	In addition to subsection (a) of this section, the city or its designee may notify the appropriate state agencies of any violations pertaining to the improper use of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines. The agencies to be notified may include, but not be limited to, the state revenue department, the state bureau of investigation, and the board of directors of the Georgia Lottery Corporation, and violators may be prosecuted under O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and any other applicable provision of state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.140)
Sec. 14-33. - Registration required. 
No registrant shall make available for use within the city limits any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine unless: 
(1)	A copy of the owner's state master license is prominently displayed at the location where any such machine is available for use, and the required sticker is securely attached to the machine pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; 
(2)	The bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is registered with the city council; and 
(3)	If required, the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is located and used in an arcade which has been duly licensed under division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.020)
Sec. 14-34. - No registration or license fees. 
No registration fee shall be required to register a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. No license fee shall be required to license an arcade. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.030)
Sec. 14-35. - Machine registration form. 
The machine registration shall be filed in writing on a form to be provided by the city and shall specify: 
(1)	The name and address of the registrant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses; 
(2)	Registrants shall list the location and address of the premises where the licensed machine or machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place; 
(3)	Registrants shall list the number of machines to be maintained on the premises;
(4)	The name and address of the owner of the machine or machines, if other than the registrant;
(5)	Specific identifying information on the type of each machine, its function and operation, and its state license number; and 
(6)	Other identifying information about the registrant's business including, but not limited to, federal employer identification and state sales tax numbers, and other pertinent information. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.040)
Sec. 14-36. - Operating regulation. 
All registrants under this article shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Gambling prohibited. Gambling devices or any gambling on the premises is prohibited. Only noncash redemption is permitted as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a.1)—(g). Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever or any gambling contrary to state law. 
(2)	Machines to be kept in plain view. All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person or persons who may frequent any place of business where such devices are kept or used for play by the public. 
(3)	Inspection. The city police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place in which any such machines are operated or set up for operation, and shall investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(4)	Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any registrant to open his business to the public unless an employee of the registrant is present. The attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. 
(5)	Refunds and adjustments. Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the registrant of the location of the machine in question; however, such refunds or adjustments shall not include refunds for any unused games or credits. 
(6)	Gross income requirements. No registrant shall derive more than 50 percent of such registrant's annual income from the business location in which the amusement machine or machines are situated from amusement machines that provide for noncash redemption as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) or (d). For the purpose of this section, annual income is the sum of the total gross receipts generated by the registrant's business at the business location where the machines are located in a calendar year. Upon request by the local government, the registrant shall provide the necessary financial documents from the registrant in order to verify the amount of annual income and the amount of such income generated from the bona fide coin-operated amusement machines as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) or (d). 
(7)	Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. No registrant who holds an arcade license shall allow the sale, consumption or use of alcoholic beverages on his premises. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.060)
Secs. 14-37—14-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARCADE LICENSE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26.
Sec. 14-61. - Required. 
Any registrant who proposes to locate more than three noncash redemption machines in any place of business, any business premises, or any other location shall be required to apply for and receive a valid arcade license prior to placing such machines into operation. An application for an arcade license shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.070)
Sec. 14-62. - Plat required; distance requirements. 
(a)	Every application for a license to operate an arcade in the city shall be accompanied by a plat prepared by a registered surveyor showing the location of the proposed arcade and the distances between the main entrance of the proposed arcade and all adjoining lands, as hereafter provided. 
(b)	No license for the operation of an arcade shall be issued for any location within 350 yards: 
(1)	Of the property line of a private residential dwelling.
(2)	Of the property line of any public library or branch of any public library.
(3)	From the property line of any church, shrine, chapel of a mortuary or other place used exclusively for religious purposes. 
(4)	Of the property line of any school or college campus. The schools and colleges referred to in this subsection shall include only such public, private or church-supported schools which teach the subjects commonly taught in the public schools and colleges of this state, and shall not include private schools or colleges wherein a specialized subject such as business, music, art, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(5)	Any premises holding a license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(c)	The distance requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section shall apply in any and all directions from the main entrance door of the proposed location, as measured in a straight line. The plat shall accompany and be made a part of the application for such license. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.080)
Sec. 14-63. - Considerations for license approval. 
(a)	In determining whether or not an arcade license applied for under this division shall be granted, renewed, transferred or issued to a new location, in addition to all the provisions of this section, the following shall be considered to be in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)	Reputation, character. The registrant's reputation, character, trade and business associations or past business ventures, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)	Previous violations of license laws. If the registrant is a previous holder of an arcade license in the city or in any other jurisdiction and has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)	Manner of conducting prior arcade business. If the registrant is a previous holder of an arcade license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder, especially as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)	Location. The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(5)	Number of licenses in general area. The number of licenses already granted for arcades in the general area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(6)	Previous revocation of license. If the registrant has had any license issued under the police powers of any governing authority previously suspended or revoked, or has had an arcade license suspended or revoked. 
(7)	Payment of taxes and other charges. Whether or not the registrant or business is delinquent in the payment of any local taxes or other fees or charges. 
(8)	Prior incidents. Evidence that a substantial number of incidents requiring police intervention have occurred within the immediate area during the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application. 
(9)	Previous denial or revocation. The denial of an application, or the revocation of a license, occurring within the preceding 12 months, which was based on the qualifications of the proposed location. 
(b)	All licenses granted under this division are privilege licenses and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Registrants who desire to renew their licenses shall file an application therefor with the permit office of the city for such renewal, upon forms approved by the city, on or before December 1 of each year. Any licenses that have been placed on probation, suspension or have been revoked by the city during the year shall be submitted on a separate list for review and further consideration. 
(c)	Upon renewal of a license to operate an arcade, verified records of sales from amusement games as they relate to the total annual income of the business shall be furnished. Verifications must be submitted by both the license holder and the management of the establishment. The city may cause an audit of the books of a business holding an arcade license to be made at any time. Failure of a registrant who holds a license to operate an arcade to cooperate in the execution of the audit shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.090)
Sec. 14-64. - Eligibility for license. 
The following individuals and organizations are not eligible for an arcade license: 
(1)	A person or persons or a corporation, partnership or other form of business organization in which any of the officers, directors or partners have been convicted of a felony in any jurisdiction. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere. 
(2)	A person or persons or a corporation, partnership or other form of business organization in which any of the officers, directors or partners have been convicted in any jurisdiction of a nonfelonious crime of moral turpitude, lottery, gambling or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages within the five years preceding the filing of the application. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere. 
(3)	A person whose license to operate an arcade has been revoked for cause in any state or territory of the United States within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)	A person who has knowingly falsified information or made any material misrepresentation on the application for a license under this division or any application under chapter 10, article II, division 2, pertaining to alcoholic beverage licenses, submitted within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)	Should any such registrant or partner, officer or director of any registrant entity, after a license had been granted, be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, or to the violation of any laws of the state regulating gambling or the lottery laws, such license shall be subject after hearing to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.020.100)
Sec. 14-65. - Application for license. 
All registrants for a license to operate an arcade shall give notice of their intention to make such application by advertisement in the form prescribed by the city. Advertising, as referred to in this section, means there shall be a sign posted 30 days prior to the hearing of the application in a prominent position on the property (where it can be read from the road); also, all new registrants shall be required to advertise three times in the legal organ before applications are heard by the city council. Advertising in the newspaper shall be during the 30-day period prior to the hearing of the application by the city council. Before the application is presented to the city council, the registrant shall furnish proof that the advertisement has been completed as required in this section. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.110)
Sec. 14-66. - License not transferable. 
No license to operate an arcade may be sold, transferred or assigned by a registrant, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons, corporation, partnership or other business entity, or to any other location or any expansion of an existing location. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void, provided and excepting, however, that if the registrant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, or one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the permit office, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A license to operate an arcade issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.120)
Sec. 14-67. - Right of suspension. 
The city council shall have the right to temporarily suspend any license issued under this division whenever a person, firm, corporation or other business organization doing business under this division shall deviate from the normal operation for which the license was obtained or fails in performance to meet the required regulations and codes set forth by the city council, or county health department; or violates any law, ordinance or regulation of the United States, the state, or the city; or when it shall be proven before the city council or its designated hearing officer that there is a violation of nuisance law; or when the health, interests and safety of the public demand the suspension of such license. The hearing officer shall report the suspension of such license to the next regular or called meeting of the city council; then the license shall be suspended, placed on probation or permanently revoked, or otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(2), § 5.20.130) 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Animal regulations, § 1.13(2).
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.
State Constitution reference—Animal control by municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; notification of bites by animals, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - City designated as bird sanctuary; prohibited acts enumerated. 
(a)	The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to kill, shoot, trap, snare, poison or otherwise maim or injure any bird within the city, or to attempt to do any of these things or otherwise do any act which would destroy or diminish bird life in the city, including the destruction of nests, feeding places, housing facilities or other places of habitation for birds. 
(Code 1995, § 6.04.010)
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62. 
Sec. 18-2. - Livestock restricted in city. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to keep any hogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, poultry or any other such animals for commercial purposes. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to keep any hogs, cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, poultry or any other such animal in a shed, pen, stall or other such enclosure within 400 feet of any residence or within 500 feet of any public street in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 6.04.020)
Sec. 18-3. - Impoundment; notice; redemption prohibited in certain instances. 
(a)	The following animals shall be subject to impoundment by the city, its agents and employees: 
(1)	All dogs upon which a valid tag indicating inoculation against rabies is not appropriately attached as provided in section 18-43. 
(2)	Any dog which, in the opinion of the animal control officer, creates a public nuisance by loud noise, offensive odors, destruction of property or landscape, vicious or intimidating behavior, and defecation on property other than that belonging to the owner of such dog. 
(3)	Any female dogs found at large in violation of section 18-44. 
(4)	Any dog whose ownership is unknown.
(5)	Any dog running at large.
(6)	All animals determined to be a public nuisance under this chapter.
(b)	Notice of the impoundment shall be given immediately by mail or telephone call to the owner of the impounded dog, if such owner may be ascertained. 
(c)	The notice of impoundment shall contain a general description of the animal impounded, including color, sex and breed, if readily ascertainable. 
(d)	Any dog or other animal impounded for being a public nuisance may not be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(e)	When, in the judgment of the city or its agents, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. 
(Code 1995, § 6.04.030)
Sec. 18-4. - Disposal; redemption; costs and expenses. 
(a)	If, following impoundment, a dog or other animal is not claimed or redeemed by its owner within seven days of impoundment for dogs wearing a collar and tag or three days of impoundment for dogs wearing no tag, as provided for thereafter, the city may dispose of such dog by any of the following methods: 
(1)	The dog may be placed in an adoptive home.
(2)	The dog or other animal may be sold.
(3)	The dog or other animal may be destroyed by such a humane method as the city may deem appropriate. 
(b)	The owner of the impounded dog or other animal may claim the dog or other animal and it may be redeemed by its owner upon payment to the city the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the dog or other animal, such costs and expenses to be determined from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1995, § 6.04.040)
Sec. 18-5. - Abandonment of any domestic animal. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any domestic animal. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § I)
Sec. 18-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, either by act or omission, to:
(1)	Overdraw, overload, torture, torment, or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance or to beat, mutilate, intentionally poison, or kill any animal or cause same to be done, or to carry or confine any animal in or upon a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or to otherwise treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; 
(2)	Keep or confine any animal where the water, shelter, ventilation, and food are not sufficient and wholesome for the preservation of an animal of its size, species, and breed; 
(3)	Keep any animal in unsanitary conditions or in such a place or condition as to become a nuisance because of odor or contagion of disease; 
(4)	Promote any fight between animals or to allow or permit any fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; or 
(5)	Abandon any animal on any public street, road, alley, or property, or to abandon any animal on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of this state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, raising animals for agricultural or food purposes, hunting wild animals in compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia, killing or injuring animals for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research, defending, or protecting one's person or property from injury or damage, pest control practices, or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine, which authorized practice shall include, but shall not be limited to, ear cropping, tail docking, and claw removal. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § I)
Secs. 18-7—18-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 18-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner of the animal means a person who owns, harbors or keeps or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. 
Premises means a parcel of land and the structures thereon. 
Registered dog means an animal licensed by the city as provided in this article. 
Running at large means any dog that is not: 
(1)	Under the control of its owner or other responsible person by means of a leash, cord, rope, strap, chain or lead held by such owner or person and securely fastened to the collar or harness attached to the animal; 
(2)	Securely enclosed by fence or by a radio controlled underground or above ground fence, confined, or restrained on premises where it may lawfully be so as to be unable to enter upon the public way or to molest persons lawfully using the public way. 
Vaccination means protection against rabies by inoculation with an antirabies vaccine, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. 
(Code 1995, § 6.08.010; Ord. of 12-5-2005, §§ II, III)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-42. - Rabies inoculation. 
All dogs over 90 days old within the city shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1995, § 6.08.020)
Sec. 18-43. - Rabies tags required. 
A valid rabies vaccination tag shall be securely attached to a collar or harness. The owner shall see that the collar or harness is attached and secured to the dog at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 6.08.030)
Sec. 18-44. - Female dog in heat. 
Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or board kennel, in such manner that the female dog cannot come in contact with another animal, except for breeding purposes. 
(Code 1995, § 6.08.040)
Sec. 18-45. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of subsections 18-41(1) and (2) shall be entitled to one warning. Thereafter any violation of the above sections subject the violator to the penalties imposed by section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § I)
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building regulation, § 1.13(4); public hazards, § 1.13(25); codes of technical regulations, § 2.25.
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 46-71 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; historic preservation, ch. 54; maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions, § 54-131 et seq.; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; sewer service, § 98-81 et seq.; zoning, ch. 102.
State Constitution reference—Power of city to provide technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. title 8; construction, alteration, etc., of buildings and other structures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; state building, plumbing, electrical, etc., codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25; fire safety standards and inspections, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12; unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Permit fees. 
Permit fees under this chapter shall be in the amounts referred to in section 2-191. 
Sec. 22-2. - Codes adopted. 
The city adopts by reference the following most recent publication of the International Codes and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70 National Electrical Code as adopted by the State of Georgia: 
International Building Code. 
International Fire Code. 
International Fuel Gas Code. 
International Plumbing Code. 
International Mechanical Code. 
International Property Maintenance Code. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70 National Electrical Code. 
The adoption of the above codes will include adoption by reference of any amendments or revisions to said codes which has occurred or may occur after the adopted publication date. 
(Code 1995, § 15.04.010; Ord. of 1-7-2008, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-12, § I)
Sec. 22-3. - Building permit required. 
Any person or business performing any construction, to include new construction or remodeling which exceeds $1,000.00 in cost, must first obtain a building permit and pay the fees provided for in section 22-1. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2010(2), § I)
Secs. 22-4—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING DEPARTMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 22-31. - Established; creation of offices. 
(a)	There is established in the city a department to be called the building department, which shall be in charge of a building official. 
(b)	There are created the following offices in the city: building inspector, gas inspector, plumbing inspector, housing inspector, electrical inspector and fire inspector, to be appointed by the mayor and council to serve at their pleasure and for such compensation as may be prescribed by them. One person may serve in each and all of the several capacities named in the section. Such official or officials need not devote his entire time to the duties thereof. 
(c)	During the temporary absence or disability of such officer or officers, the appointing authority shall designate an acting official to serve. 
(Code 1995, § 2.16.010)
Sec. 22-32. - Right of entry. 
The building official or any of the inspectors named in section 22-31, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1995, § 2.16.020)
Secs. 22-33—22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 22-61. - System established. 
A uniform system for numbering all houses, buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the city is hereby established. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(2), § 1)
Sec. 22-62. - Assignment of numbers. 
Numbers for all houses, businesses, and other structures within the corporate limits of the city shall be numbered and posted in conformity with numbers established and assigned by the county E-9-1-1 emergency numbering system. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(2), § 2)
Sec. 22-63. - Posting of numbers. 
(a)	The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house, building, or other structure to which a number has been assigned and which number has not been posted will post such number in conformity with this article. 
(b)	The city, the owner or occupant or person in charge of a house, building, or other structure to which a number has been assigned shall affix the assigned number in a conspicuous manner in a conspicuous place. If the house, building, or other structure receives on-premises mail by a U.S. Postal Service approved box, the number may be affixed to that post office box or to any structure supporting that mailbox. Otherwise, the number shall be displayed on the front of the building or in some other manner in front of the front entrance, provided the number is clearly discernable and visible from the street, private drive, or alley. 
(c)	It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing a number to remove any number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to such structure by the county E-9-1-1 system. 
(d)	In case a building or house is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance may display a separate number. If a building or other structure also has an entrance or exit abutting on an alley or a side street the same number as assigned herein shall be affixed to the rear or side entrance. 
(e)	Numerals indicating the official numbers shall be posted in a manner so as to be legible and distinguishable from the street, private drive or alley on which the property is located. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(2), § 3)
Sec. 22-64. - New structures. 
No building permit shall be issued for any house, building, or other structure until the owner or developer has procured from the county E-9-1-1 system the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any house, building, or other structure erected or repaired after May 5, 2003, shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(2), § 4)
Sec. 22-65. - Penalties. 
If the owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building refuses to comply with the terms of this article by failing to affix the number assigned within 90 days after notification, or by failing within such 90-day period to remove any old numbers affixed to such house, or house entrance, or elsewhere, which may be confused with the number assigned thereto, he may be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 5-5-2003(2), § 5)
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Business regulation and taxation, § 1.13(5), (35); finance, art. VI.
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; alcoholic beverages licenses, § 10-71 et seq.; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; arcade license, § 14-61 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86; telecommunications, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98.
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. title 10; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. title 43; disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, operating businesses or practicing professions, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq.; persons selling agricultural products and implements, jugs and flowerpots, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6; exemptions from municipal taxes and license fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 et seq.; sale of property for municipal taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359; specific, business, and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-161 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86.
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)	The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without limitation to, the following: 
a.	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred;
b.	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness;
c.	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services;
d.	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and
e.	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income.
(2)	The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following:
a.	Sales, use or excise taxes;
b.	Sales returns, allowances and discounts;
c.	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2); 
d.	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; and 
e.	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location and office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location and office for the personal property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location and office for the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by the city as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. No local government is authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax, as defined in this section. Regulatory fees do not include the development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.020(B))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 26-32. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.180))
Sec. 26-33. - Required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city, or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an annual occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or his deputies or to any police officer of the city upon his or their request. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.010))
Sec. 26-34. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)	A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)	A regulatory fee may be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)	The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions shall be set by the city council from time to time and shall be published for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.030))
Sec. 26-35. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations and offices within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)	An occupation tax fee schedule shall be formulated from time to time by the city council and shall be available for public inspection. 
(c)	The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have. 
(d)	The city shall not require an occupation tax from those real estate brokers, agents or companies whose offices are located outside the city and sell property inside the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.040))
Sec. 26-36. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location and office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.050))
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 26-37. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.060))
Sec. 26-38. - Number of businesses considered operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.070))
Sec. 26-39. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations, as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on the number of employees.
(2)	A fee, as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)	This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by October 15 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.080))
Sec. 26-40. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.090))
Sec. 26-41. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.100))
Sec. 26-42. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each occupation tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 of each year, shall be delinquent if not paid by March 1 of each year, and shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in section 26-32. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a penalty imposed. The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon the conviction of the city judge, be punished by a fine or imprisonment, either or both in the discretion of the city judge. 
(b)	In addition to the remedies specified in subsection (a) of this section, the city may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.110, 5.04.220))
Sec. 26-43. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the employees can be allocated to each location, the employees used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those employees attributed to each city location. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)	Information necessary to allocate the number of employees of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)	Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's number of employees by other local governments. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.120))
Sec. 26-44. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.130))
Sec. 26-45. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)	Each person who is licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.140))
Sec. 26-46. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.150))
Sec. 26-47. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for the business as described in this article; and in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing the business. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.160))
Sec. 26-48. - When registration due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)	Each registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided in this article before March 1 of each year, on the second day of March of each year thereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained the registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 26-32. These penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article, and may be collected by the remedies provided in this article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)	The registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the city clerk; and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.170))
Sec. 26-49. - Subpoena and arresting powers. 
The city and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspector with full subpoena and arresting powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.190))
Sec. 26-50. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission.
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105.
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq.
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15.
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355.
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55.
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.200))
Sec. 26-51. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.210))
Sec. 26-52. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the number of employees of each location will be entered on a separate occupation tax return and the tax will be calculated at the rate of the dominant line of business conducted by the business identified on a form to be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.230))
Sec. 26-53. - Inspections of books and records. 
The city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city at its discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.240))
Sec. 26-54. - Revocation. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay an occupation tax or any part of an occupation tax before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to do business in the city for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city in accordance with provisions in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.250))
Sec. 26-55. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city, after the registration for the business has been revoked; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during the business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct its business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.260))
Sec. 26-56. - Execution; liens. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk shall, upon any tax or installment of the tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the defendant located in the city, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other related proceedings shall be as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state; and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.270))
Sec. 26-57. - Amendment; repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, in compliance with applicable provisions of the city Charter, this Code, and applicable state and federal laws, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. The amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change their classification. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.280))
Sec. 26-58. - Furnishing of incomplete or false information. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall furnish or shall cause to be furnished any false, misleading or incomplete information to any city official, agent or representative regarding any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city which is subject to business registration or occupation tax covered by this article. The violation of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to other legal remedies available to the city pursuant to this article, may be grounds for the suspension or revocation of existing business tax registrations or occupation tax registration and the denial or nonrenewal of future business tax registrations or occupation tax registrations issued by the city. The denial, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation shall be in writing with the reasons for the adverse action stated therein. Within ten days of such adverse action, the registrant or applicant may appeal the denial to the city council and request a due process hearing. The due process hearing shall be held within ten days of the receipt of the request and shall be held in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The applicant or registrant may present witnesses and evidence, cross examine witnesses for the city, may retain legal counsel at its own expense, and a record shall be made of the due process hearing. The city council shall render a decision within ten business days after the date of the due process hearing. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city council to stay any adverse action pending final resolution of the matter. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.285))
Sec. 26-59. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.290))
Sec. 26-60. - Enforcement of article. 
It is the duty of the city clerk and police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed, and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is the further duty of the city clerk, chief of police, members of the police department, and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city as often as, in their judgment, it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.300))
Sec. 26-61. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by council. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions of this article relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.310))
Sec. 26-62. - Public hearings required. 
The city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.320))
Sec. 26-63. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation taxes to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council or a plan. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.330))
Sec. 26-64. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this article that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 11-26-2001(1), § 1(5.04.340))
Secs. 26-65—26-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 26-101. - Insurer license fees—Levied. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 26-102, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $40.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1995, § 5.16.100; Ord. of 5-2-2011(1), § 1)
Sec. 26-102. - Same—Additional locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Code 1995, § 5.16.020; Ord. of 5-2-2011(1), § 2)
Sec. 26-103. - Independent agencies, brokers, not otherwise licensed. 
There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 26-101, in the amount of $25.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 5.16.030)
Sec. 26-104. - Gross premium tax. 
(a)	Imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 26-101. 
(b)	All other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 26-101. 
(Code 1995, § 5-16-040; Ord. of 5-2-2011(1), §§ 3, 4)
Sec. 26-105. - Administrative provisions. 
(a)	The license fees levied by sections 26-101—26-103 are due and payable on January 1 of each year. Any such license fee not paid within 60 days after the same becomes due for each respective year shall be delinquent. 
(b)	The premium taxes levied by section 26-104 shall be due and payable on January 1 of the year for which same are levied. Any insurance company not reporting and paying any premium tax levied under the provisions of this subsection within 90 days after such premium tax becomes due shall be delinquent. 
(c)	Every insurance company doing business within the city and subject to the fees and taxes imposed by the provisions of this section shall file with the city clerk on forms prescribed by the city clerk, a report showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of each and every business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; the classes of insurance written; and such other reasonable information as may be required; and, in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premium received, by class, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation or their agents to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. The report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee and premium tax. 
(d)	The person responsible for each such insurance business location subject to a license fee under section 26-102 shall file with the city clerk a report, on forms prescribed by the city clerk, showing the address of the business location; the class or classes of insurance written; the names of the person writing the insurance at such location; the names of the companies represented; and such other reasonable information as may be required. Such report shall be made over affidavit of the person in charge of such business location. It is declared to be a violation of this article for any person, firm, corporation or their agents to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. The report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee. 
(e)	All reports required to be filed under this article shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the officers of the city, responsible for administering this article. 
(Code 1995, § 5.16.050)
Sec. 26-106. - Enforcement by execution. 
The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 5.16.060)
Secs. 26-107—26-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance adopted Dec. 4, 2006, repealed the former art. IV and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. IV, §§ 26-141—26-162, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 1(6-201)—(622) of an ordinance adopted Nov. 26, 2001.
State Law reference— Adult bookstores and movie houses, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3.
Sec. 26-141. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)	It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)	Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in a public hearing and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the council finds: 
(1)	Sexually oriented businesses cause ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities, including, but not limited to, prostitution and illicit drug trafficking and consumption, both within such businesses and in the areas immediately nearby, which are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)	Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses, defined in this article as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)	Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows. 
(4)	Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of sexually oriented businesses. 
(5)	Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS) and genital herpes. 
(6)	Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by human immunodeficiency virus (11W) in the United States. 
(7)	The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States, as well as the state, reported annually has risen. 
(8)	In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual conduct, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(9)	According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(10)	Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(11)	Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view adult oriented films. 
(12)	The findings noted in subsections (b)(1)—(11) and (13)—(15) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(13)	Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(14)	A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(15)	Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(16)	Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(17)	The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(18)	In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct. 
(19)	The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(20)	The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(21)	The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store and adult video store mean a commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, or any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)	Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user of others. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)	Persons who appear seminude;
(2)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)	Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment, which: 
(1)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or seminude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Employee, employ and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or by another status. The term "employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Enforcement officer means such person or persons as may be designated by the city council. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees or offers to: 
(1)	Act as a companion, guide or date;
(2)	Privately model lingerie; or
(3)	Privately perform a striptease.
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort agency means a person or business association that for a fee, tip or other consideration furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes. 
Establish and establishment mean and include any of the following: 
(1)	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)	The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)	The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Nude, nudity and a state of nudity mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or anal cleft with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Operate and cause to be operated mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. The term "operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Regularly features and regularly shown mean a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business. 
Seminude and in a seminude condition mean the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Seminude model studio means a commercial establishment which regularly features a person who appears seminude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a proprietary license by any state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented business shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, erotic dance establishment, escort agency, seminude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)	The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)	Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of any jurisdiction; 
(2)	For which less than:
a.	Two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.	Five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.	Five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)	The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts;
(2)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(3)	Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
Substantial enlargement, of a sexually oriented business, means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the date the ordinance from which this article derives takes effect. 
Transfer of ownership or control, of a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2)	The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
(3)	The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-143. - License required. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person:
(1)	To operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this article. 
(2)	Who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this article. 
(3)	To obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this article. 
(b)	An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(c)	An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the city a completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the city clerk. An application shall be considered complete if it includes the information required in this section. The applicant shall be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application shall be notarized. The application shall include the information called for in subsections (1)—(22), as follows: 
(1)	The full true name and any other names used by the applicant.
(2)	The present address and telephone number of the applicant.
(3)	The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)	Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(5)	The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth.
(6)	Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)	Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)	The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)	All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)	If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)	The names and addressees of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)	Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)	The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)	If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding share of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)	The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant.
(16)	If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)	At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)	Address of the premises to be licensed.
(19)	Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)	A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or set or other business hereunder regulated. 
(21)	The application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(22)	Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.	If the applicant is an individual, the individual;
b.	If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner;
c.	If a corporation, by the president of the corporation;
(d)	The information provided by an applicant in connection with the application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the city on a confidential business, and may be disclosed only: 
(1)	To other governmental agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function; or 
(2)	As may otherwise be required by law or a court order.
(e)	The information provided pursuant to subsections (c)(1)—(22) of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city within ten working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(f)	If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If the person that wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual (such as a corporation), each officer, director, general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to the management of the business shall sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is granted. 
(g)	An individual or corporate entity which has complied with article II of this chapter by completing such business registration or occupation tax return information as required by the city is not exempt from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business license. An individual or corporate entity which operates a sexually oriented business and has complied with article II of this chapter shall also comply with the requirements and provisions of this article, where applicable. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-144. - Issuance of license. 
(a)	Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall, within 30 days after the receipt of a completed application, either issue a license or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The city shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
(1)	An applicant is less than 18 years of age.
(2)	An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)	An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 26-144 for issuance of the license. 
(4)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, felony, or other crime of moral turpitude. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect under this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "conviction:" 
a.	Means a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendre; and
b.	Includes a conviction of any business entity for which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a controlling interest. 
(5)	The license application fee required by this article has not been paid.
(6)	An applicant has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(7)	The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses are allowed to operate under the city's zoning ordinances, or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented businesses in the appropriate zoning district(s). 
(8)	The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership has had a sexually oriented business license or permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(9)	The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, if used, as proposed by the applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(10)	That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(11)	That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will not be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(12)	That the proposed premise will be located within 1,000 feet of a church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(13)	That the grant of such license will cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state or the United States; or 
(14)	That the person making the application is prohibited, as a licensee, pursuant to section 26-145. 
(b)	An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to subsection (a)(4) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by the definition of specified criminal activity in section 26-142 has elapsed. 
(c)	The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized city official. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-145. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)	No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by:
(1)	An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at any location inside or outside the city. 
(2)	Any person who is not of good moral character.
(3)	Any corporation of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)	Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)	Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)	Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)	When it is determined that a sufficient number of current licenses necessary to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the City of Lavonia have been issued, no license shall be issued to an applicant. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-146. - Fees. 
(a)	The nonrefundable initial license fee and annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall be set by the city council at an amount determined to be sufficient to pay the cost of administering this program, subject to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)	In no event shall the fees exceed $250.00 for the initial license and $125.00 for the renewal fee for a sexually oriented business license. In no event shall the fees exceed $100.00 for the initial license, and $50.00 for the renewal fee, for a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-147. - Inspection. 
(a)	For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article, an applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this article, normally and regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy. 
(b)	The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-148. - Expiration of license. 
(a)	Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 26-143. An application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)	When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date that the denial became final. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-149. - Suspension. 
The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)	Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or
(2)	Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-150. - Revocation. 
(a)	The city shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of suspension in section 26-149 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)	The city shall issue a written statement of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the city determines that a licensee: 
(1)	Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)	Has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(3)	Has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4)	Has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)	Has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection will not apply to an adult motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur either: 
a.	In exchange for money; or
b.	In a public place or within public view.
(c)	The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)	When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 26-151, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of section 26-151(b) are met, a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation found in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(4) of this section has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-151. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)	If the city determines that facts exist for the denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this article, the city shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the city. Within five working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the city, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked. Within five working days of the receipt of the respondent's written response, the city shall notify the respondent in writing of the hearing date on the respondent's denial, suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(1)	Within 15 working days of the receipt of the respondent's written response, the city council shall conduct a hearing at which the respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his behalf. If a response is not received by the city council in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the city council finds that grounds as specified in this article exist for denial, suspension or revocation, then such denial, suspension or revocation shall become final five days after the city council sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been denied, suspended or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)	If the city council finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the city council shall withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the license. 
(b)	When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license becomes final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked, shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-152. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-153. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)	It is a violation of this article to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than those portions of a B-3 heavy industrial district, as defined and described in the city's zoning code (chapter 102) and this article as amended. 
(b)	It is a violation of this article to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)	A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
(2)	A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. The term "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
(3)	A boundary of a residential district as defined in the city's zoning code (chapter 102) as amended. 
(4)	A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city park and recreation authorities. 
(5)	The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the city's zoning code (chapter 102) as amended. 
(6)	An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment.
(7)	Any premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state. 
(c)	It is a violation of this article if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer or ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)	It is a violation of this article if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)	For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section. The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section. 
(f)	For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(g)	Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on December 31, 2006, shall be deemed a nonconforming use. In all instances where applicable, the nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. After December 31, 2007, any sexually oriented business deemed as a nonconforming use in this subsection shall be required to comply with any and all of the terms and conditions of this article, and failure to so comply will constitute a violation of this article. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming. 
(h)	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (b) of this section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Cross reference— Zoning, ch. 102. 
Sec. 26-154. - Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)	A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following: 
(1)	Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3)	No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city. 
(4)	It is the duty of the premises of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)	No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(8)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot candles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)	It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)	No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths.
(11)	No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)	The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)	The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)	The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be construed of or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)	A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1)—(14) of this section commits a violation of this article if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-155. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)	An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b)	A person commits a violation of this article if the person acts as an escort, or agrees to act as an escort, for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-156. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)	It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(b)	It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a seminude condition, unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, is at least six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)	It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)	It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude, to knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-157. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-158. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 12:00 midnight and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-159. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-156 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)	By a proprietary school, licensed by a state; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)	By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)	In a structure:
a.	Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.	Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.	Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-160. - Malt beverage and wine licenses; liquor or distilled spirits licenses. 
Pursuant to the authority of Ga. Const. art. III, § VII, ¶ VII, no malt beverage and wine license nor any liquor or distilled spirits license shall be issued for any location at which a sexually oriented business is currently operating or will be operating in the future. It is the intent of this section to require an applicant to choose between obtaining a malt beverage and wine license or liquor or distilled spirits license versus obtaining a license to operate a sexually oriented business pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10. 
Sec. 26-161. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 26-152 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for violation of this article. Such violations shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-12. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a separate offense or violation. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
Sec. 26-162. - Valid provisions independent. 
Each section and provision of this article are declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(1), § I)
ARTICLE V. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 26-163. - Generally. 
Yard sales shall be permitted within the city and classified as follows: 
(1)	Residential family. Yard sales shall be permitted as a means for city residents to dispose of unwanted personal merchandise via a one- or two-day sale to be conducted on the residential property owned by the resident conducting said sale. The maximum period for each sale shall be two consecutive days with a maximum of two yard sale permits per year per residential family. 
(2)	Churches and non-profit organizations. Yard sales shall be permitted as a fund raiser for churches and non-profit organizations located within the city and shall be limited to two sales per year. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-164. - Yard sale permit required (no fee). 
All yard sales require a yard sale permit that includes the sign permit. There is no fee for this permit and must be obtained from the city clerk's office prior to day of the sale. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-165. - Yard sale advertising signs. 
(a)	Two (2) signs advertising the sale may be posted the day before the sale on the property of the person, church or organization conducting the sale. 
(b)	Two off-premises directional signs may be posted on the city street right-of way the morning of the sale. No signs will be allowed to be posted on state right-of-ways of Highway 17, 59, or 77, utility poles or city street light poles. 
(c)	All directional signs must be removed from the city rights-of-way at the conclusion of the sale. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-166. - Yard sale merchandise. 
No new or used merchandise may be purchased or brought in for a sale. All merchandise offered for sale must be owned by the family, church members or organization members conducting the sale. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-167. - Days and hours of the sale. 
Yard sales may be conducted Monday through Saturday during day light hours only. No Sunday yard sales will be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-168. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)	Parking in the street so as to impede the normal flow of traffic or create congestion.
(2)	No public address system or "hawking" of vehicular traffic.
(3)	No alcoholic beverages of any type may be served or given away on or near the premises where the sale is being conducted. 
(4)	Any other activity deemed inappropriate or illegal by an enforcement official of the city during the operating hours of the sale. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
Sec. 26-169. - Penalties. 
Any person conducting a yard sale that fails to comply with any part of this article shall be issued a citation to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer all charges, and if convicted, shall be fined a minimum of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2011)
ARTICLE VI. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESMEN 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance of July 5, 2011 amended the Code by adding new provisions designated as Art. V. In order to prevent duplication of article numbers, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. VI at the discretion of the editor.
Sec. 26-170. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed solicitor means any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence means every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting means any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)	Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; 
(2)	Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)	Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-171. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-172. - Permit required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of soliciting or calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this article. 
(b)	The requirement of subsection (a) of this section is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. The requirement: 
(1)	Is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(2)	Does not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
(c)	Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the city carry upon his person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
(d)	Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person or association by whom the solicitor is employed or represents, a photograph of the solicitor and a physical description. The solicitor shall make themselves available for photographing and such other investigation as may be required by the city. 
(e)	The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than six months. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-173. - Permit applications. 
(a)	Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city. The city manager shall have applications available on request. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application: 
(1)	Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)	Addresses of places of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)	Age of the applicant;
(4)	Physical description of the applicant;
(5)	Name and address of the person or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(6)	Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(7)	Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(8)	Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
(9)	Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(10)	The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this article, if any; 
(11)	Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(12)	Names of magazines, books or journals to be sold;
(13)	Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house-to-house;
(14)	Proposed method of operation;
(15)	Description and license plate number of vehicles intended to be operated by the applicant;
(16)	Signature of applicant; and
(17)	Social Security number of applicant.
(b)	All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(c)	The applicant shall submit to a background investigation by the city police department or designee. 
(d)	The city manager shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
(e)	No permit shall be issued to any person:
(1)	Who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; 
(2)	Who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or
(3)	Whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided.
(f)	The nonrefundable fee for a permit for six months for each solicitor shall be as established by resolution. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-174. - Permit denial, suspension or revocation; hearings. 
(a)	Any permit issued hereunder shall be denied, suspended or revoked by the city manager or designee if the applicant or holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, has made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. Should the city manager deny an application under this article, written notice of the denial shall be provided to the applicant by the city manager setting forth the reason(s) for the denial, and advise the applicant of the right to appeal said decision to the mayor and council within 30 days of the city manager's denial. 
(b)	Whenever the city manager determines there is cause to suspend or revoke the permit issued hereunder, the city manager or designee shall give the permit holder written notice at least 15 days prior to an administrative hearing of the time, place, purpose of the hearing, and a statement or the charge(s) upon which the administrative hearing before the city manager shall be held in accordance with this section. 
(c)	The procedure for administrative hearings heard under this chapter by the city manager shall be set forth by the city manager. The city manager shall reach a decision on the matter within ten days following the close of the hearing and give written notice of said decision. The decision of the city manager shall be final unless the permit holder files a notice of appeal to the city manager within 30 days of receiving notice of said decision. 
(d)	The mayor and council shall hear appeals to decisions by the city manager to deny applications for permits, as well as appeals to decisions by the city manager to suspend or revoke such permits. 
(e)	Any such appeal to the mayor and council shall be subject to de novo review and shall be in accordance with subsections (e), (f) and (g). A hearing before the city council shall be scheduled within 60 days following the receipt by the city manager of the applicant or permit holder's notice of appeal. 
(f)	Applicants or permit holders shall be given written notice of the date, time, and place when the matter at issue will be heard by the city council. The applicant or permit holder shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and present evidence. Twenty days' notice shall be deemed reasonable. 
(g)	The procedure for hearings of the mayor and council under this chapter shall conform to the administrative hearings procedure as passed by resolution of the city council. Upon close of the public hearing, the city council shall reach a decision on the matter before it, and the decision of the city council shall be final unless the applicant or permit holder applies to the Franklin County Superior Court by filing a petition for writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-175. - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city manager's office. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Sec. 26-176. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether by himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article. 
(b)	It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
(c)	Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(d)	It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(1), § I)
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Section I of an ordinance adopted Oct. 6, 2008, repealed the former ch. 30 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 30, §§ 30-31—30-34, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 12.12.010—12.12.040 of the 1995 Code.
Charter reference— Public improvements, § 1.13(26).
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.
State Law reference— Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 30-2. - Purpose authority; enactment. 
The mayor and council of the city find that the historical and cultural heritage of the municipality is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and overall general welfare of the people of the city and of the public generally. Further, the city acknowledges that the city cemetery known as the Burgess Cemetery is uniquely precious and vulnerable thus deserving of devoted stewardship; that the city is richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased; that many native pioneers and early residents were integral to the community's development; and that the resting places and memorials of those who have passed are valuable to current and future generations and are within the heart of the National Register Historical Districts of the city. 
Therefore, with the intent of establishing policies and regulations regarding the use and historical preservation of the Burgess Cemetery for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city, the mayor and council of the city hereby ordain and enact into law the cemetery ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all land, buildings, structures present and future, roadways, and improvements within the boundaries delineated as the Burgess Cemetery or any future city cemeteries designated as such on the official city boundary and zoning map. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-4. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be called the "cemetery ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-5. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Burial means the disposition of human remains by earthen burial in a grave. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of internment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to internment. Such term also means any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, mausoleum, stoneware, pottery, vegetation, grass, rock, sand, stone, or any other grave object erected, placed, or deposited incident to or subsequent to internment. 
Burial rights means the deeded interest to a lot or space designated for internments. 
Burial space means a single space within a plot designed for the internment of one human body. 
Cemetery means all land in and presently owned by or under the supervision of the city devoted to the internment of human remains, either burial park or earth internments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt internments or a combination of one or more thereof, and all land hereinafter acquired by the city for such purposes. 
City means the City of Lavonia, Franklin County, Georgia. 
City care means the usual and customary cemetery common area maintenance performed by the city including the mowing of grass, trimming of vegetation, the removal of rubbish, furnished floral arrangements, and trash for all time thereafter; city care does not include work on monuments, markers, structures, or other landscape elements or other unusual care. 
Commission means the city cemetery commission created and established pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
Cremains means the cremated remains of a human body. 
Crypt means a wholly or partially underground structure of suitable stone or marble for the entombment of human remains or cremains. 
Descendent means a person or a group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. 19-1-1 et seq., as amended. 
Disinterment means the removal of the buried remains of a deceased person, the casket, if any, and the vault or burial receptacle, if any, from the ground. 
Foundation means the base upon which a marker, monument, or mausoleum is installed on the grave site. 
Funeral procession means multiple vehicles traveling in an orderly fashion from a church or funeral chapel to a graveside burial site. 
Internment means the permanent disposition of the remains of a deceased human being by cremation, inurnment, entombment or direct earthen burial. 
Lot means the subdivision of land within a cemetery for the internment of one or more persons. 
Marker means a grave marker upon the lot to identify individual graves. Also know as a grave marker, headstone, etc. 
Mausoleum means a stone or marble structure for the aboveground entombment of the dead. 
Monument means a memorial erected on a lot principally to identify the family name. 
Person means any individual, partnership, association, society, organization, or corporation. 
Remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
Vault means a prefabricated receptacle for a casket or human remains usually placed below ground. 
Visitor means any person or group of persons who enter the cemetery. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-6—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CARE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-26. - Power of mayor and council. 
The mayor and city council shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)	Provide, either by city ownership or private contract, within the city cemeteries as needed for the burial of the dead. 
(2)	Regulate and control the internments in such cemeteries;
(3)	Exercise regulatory control and oversight for such cemeteries, and
(4)	Guarantee city care to the common grounds areas in such cemeteries.
(5)	Establish the operational hours of such cemeteries.
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-27. - Administration. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall be responsible for management of all municipal cemeteries. All record registration, lot sales receipts, deed preparation, and other cemetery fee payments shall be made to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-28. - Fees. 
Fees for the municipal cemeteries shall be those established by the mayor and city council and listed in the adopted schedule of fees per section 2-191. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-29. - Property sale proceeds. 
All proceeds from cemetery lot sales shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and applied to the city care expenses associated with the maintenance and upkeep of Burgess Cemetery and/or any other future cemeteries that may be purchased by the city for the burial of the dead. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-30—30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY COMMISSION 

Sec. 30-41. - Creation. 
The title of the commission shall be the "Lavonia Cemetery Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "commission"). The commission shall have authority as established in section 30-43 or as directed by the mayor and council of the city, shall be considered a part of the planning and development functions of the city government, and shall be administered by the city manager in association with the planning and zoning and inspections departments. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-42. - Membership (number, appointment and terms). 
The commission shall consist of five members who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in funeral history, architecture, historical preservation, management, landscape design, or any related field. At least four commission members shall be registered voters of the city and one shall be a liaison member of the city historic preservation commission. Commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and council and serve two-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, the initial appointments for three members shall be three years and two members for two years. All successive terms thereinafter shall be for a period of two years each. Commission members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council and without compensation. However, commission members shall be reimbursed for expenses related to travel for education and training seminars as required by the council. This commission shall be subject to all applicable city policies and code of ethics. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-43. - Powers. 
The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)	Prepare and maintain a grave inventory and conduct surveys of all burial objects, lots, and/or other relevant features of the cemetery; 
(2)	Recommend to the mayor and council any preservation issues that may arise from time to time; 
(3)	Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to the Burgess Cemetery as the mayor and council or the commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)	Make landscape or tree planting recommendations as necessary to enhance the overall appearance and preservation of the Burgess Cemetery historical assets. 
(5)	Conduct educational or special programs regarding cemetery preservation as a means of increasing public awareness and support; 
(6)	Consult with cemetery experts in the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources, the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Association for Gravestone Studies, or any other cemetery authorities and professionals as necessary for the purposes of this chapter; 
(7)	Establish appropriate contacts and liaisons with other similar boards or commissions, departments, organizations, and municipalities with the county, region, or state; 
(8)	Seek out any state or federal funds for cemetery stewardship and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; 
(9)	On behalf of the city, the commission may receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property, provided that the commission shall not obligate the city without prior approval of the mayor and council and that such funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds; 
(10)	Provide recommendations and oversight to the planning and zoning commission regarding the impact of all proposed re-zoning actions involving adjacent properties of the Burgess Cemetery or any future cemeteries provided by the city for burial of the dead under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-44. - Rules. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business; shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. A quorum shall consist of a majority of commission members. The commission may elect officers of its choosing to establish parliamentary procedure and meeting protocol. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-45. - Conflict of interest. 
At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has an ownership or other vested interest, that member shall abstain from voting or discussion of the project, other than answering direct questions. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-46. - Records. 
A public record shall be kept at City Hall of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and recommended actions. The commission shall additionally keep a copy of all cemetery surveys, planning studies, rules and regulations applicable to the usage of commission authority as established by section 30-43. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Secs. 30-47—30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-61. - Authority to adopt, amend, repeal. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to adopt, amend, or repeal such rules and regulations governing Burgess Cemetery and any other future city cemetery, including, but not limited to, rules governing internment, maintenance, monuments and other markers, mausoleums, constructions of walkways and pedestrian pathways, walls, sitting areas, lighting, etc. The governing body additionally reserves the right from time to time to adjust lot prices, make adjustments to maintenance and city care, planting of shrubbery, flowers and trees, security, waste removal, and such other rules which may be deemed wise in the judgment of the mayor and council to maintain the historical assets of the Burgess Cemetery or any other future city cemetery. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-62. - Same/to govern city cemeteries, including Burgess Cemetery. 
All burial lots and common areas in city cemeteries including Burgess Cemetery shall be governed by the rules and regulations in force as adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-63. - Sale of lots. 
(a)	All cemetery lot sale transactions are made on a first come basis and are subject to burial lot availability and any other restrictions as may apply regarding cemetery location, parcel sizes for family plots, and grave markers. 
(b)	A single burial space is five feet by ten feet. A minimum purchase of two lots (ten feet × ten feet) is required by the city. An individual may purchase up to a maximum of 16 lots designated as family burial plots. 
(c)	In the event that a purchaser of a lot(s) in city cemeteries including Burgess Cemetery desires to resell such lot(s), he must first offer in writing the same to the city at the current selling price of the lots, and the city shall have one day from the receipt of such offer in which to purchase the lot(s). In the event the city elects not to purchase the lot(s) within the 15 day period, the owner shall be free to sell the same to any available buyer under any terms, conditions, prices decided and agreed upon by the parties. The seller shall notify the city clerk within 15 days of the sale as to the new owner in order that city records can be corrected. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-64. - Interments within the city limits. 
(a)	Interments within the city shall be in the Burgess Cemetery or any other cemetery owned by the city. 
(b)	Only one interment shall be permitted per burial space (five feet × ten feet) except for double depth burials. The city may permit double depth burials, i.e. the burial of two infants or two sets of cremated remains per single burial space. 
(c)	Two interments may be made per approved mausoleum structures.
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-65. - Burial or exhuming/business license required. 
No person, contractor, or sub-contractor shall dig any grave, or bury, or attempt to bury, exhume, or remove any human remains or burial object within the city cemeteries, including Burgess Cemetery, without a current city business license issued by the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-66. - Opening of graves, burial spaces/permit required. 
No grave burial space shall be opened for the purpose of interment or disinterment in the city cemeteries without first filling out a permit application from the city inspections department. The inspections department shall locate and mark the grave site for the contractor. All contractors and sub-contractors shall meet the minimum specifications as adopted, amended, or repealed under article IV, Rules and Regulations. All excess grave dirt shall be deposited in the approved locations as designated by the inspections department and the burial space grounds returned to a manicured "before grave opening condition." 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-67. - Monuments, grave markers, coping—License and permit required. 
A city business license and a permit from the inspections department are required of all vendors, contractors or sub-contractors for the installation of monuments, grave markers, or coping in Burgess Cemetery. Mausoleums require a separate set of approved site drawings and specifications before a construction permit will be issued by the inspections department. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-68. - Vaults required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be buried in a city cemetery unless the casket is placed in a city approved vault made of concrete, metal, cast iron, or another material that has similar structural properties and approved for vault construction in the state. Exceptions to the provisions of this section shall be granted for infant or cremation burials only. In such instances, the design and construction of the burial vault shall be approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-69. - Monuments, grave markers, gravestones—Types allowed. 
(a)	The following types of monuments, grave markers, and grave stones are allowed in the historic sections of the Burgess Cemetery: 
(1)	Upright granite monuments installed on a granite base.
(2)	Flat granite or concrete ground markers.
(3)	Military markers.
(b)	The following types of grave markers are required in the new sections of the Burgess Cemetery as referred to herein and are more particularly identified on a plat of the Burgess Cemetery on file in the office of the city clerk. No other types of monuments, grave markers, or coping will be approved for installation in these sections: 
(1)	Flat bronze or granite head and grave blanket markers only.
(2)	Flat bronze or granite plot corner markers only, no coping allowed.
(3)	Mausoleums subject to approval by the mayor and council or the city manager.
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I; Ord. of 4-7-2014(1))
Sec. 30-70. - Monument, grave markers—Foundation requirements. 
Every person, contractor, or sub-contractor erecting, or causing to be erected, any monument, marker, or gravestone within the city cemeteries, shall pour a concrete foundation of a minimum 3000 psi mix six inches thick and at least 125 percent the base size of the monument to provide a firm foundation, so that such gravestone or monument, when thus erected, will have a solid and secure foundation, preventing same from leaning, falling over or sinking after installation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-71. - Coping, lot boundary markers, grave blankets—Types allowed. 
Lot boundary markers (i.e. corner markers) shall be allowed on all burial spaces, coping shall be allowed on a minimum four-grave parcel lot. Special case applications on burial space plots containing more than four lots (i.e. family plots) may be allowed at the discretion of the inspections department after approved plans have been submitted, reviewed and approved by same. All coping and exterior boundary marking must be installed on the inside measurement of the grave lot so as to not exceed the overall lot dimensions. Example: An eight-lot family plot measures 20 feet × 20 feet. The overall exterior measurement of the installed coping must not exceed 20 feet × 20 feet. 
The following types of coping and boundary corner markers shall be allowed in the historic sections of the city cemeteries including Burgess Cemetery: 
(1)	Granite or marble in minimum four-inch × four-inch × nine-foot four-inch lengths (allows for corners). 
(2)	Pre-formed concrete in minimum four-inch × four-inch × nine-foot four-inch lengths (allows for corners). 
(3)	Corner markers shall be granite, marble or stone.
(4)	Brick, pre-cast or split-faced stone if mounted on an approved minimum four-inch 3000 psi mix concrete foundation. 
(5)	Marble or granite "blankets or covers."
(6)	Only marble chips, pea gravel, and sand ground cover shall be allowed inside the coping or boundary markers; no grass allowed. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-72. - Benches, seating areas within family plots. 
One bench made of granite, stone, or metal shall be allowed inside a minimum eight grave family plot. No other seating shall be allowed. All benches or approved seating must be located on the inside of the coping or boundary marker. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-73. - Seasonal fresh, artificial and basket floral arrangements. 
Seasonal fresh or artificial floral arrangements are permitted on all grave lots. Floral and basket arrangements must be anchored to the grave lot to keep same from being wind-blown into the common areas or adjacent grave sites. All faded, discolored, and seasonal arrangements shall be removed in a timely manner by the property caretakers and deposited in the special dumpster provided for that purpose on the east side of the cemetery. All wind-blown floral arrangements found in the common area of the cemetery shall be removed and disposed of in the dumpster by city personnel without regard to the ownership. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-74. - Hours of operation. 
The normal hours of operation each day of all city cemeteries are 7:00 a.m. until dusk. The cemetery gates shall be locked and opened by city personnel. No trespassing after hours is permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-75. - Prohibited acts, burial space decoration, plantings in city cemeteries. 
The following are prohibited in the city cemeteries: 
(1)	Reckless motor vehicle operation: cemetery speed limit is five mph.
(2)	Use of any cemetery roadway for vehicular traffic or parking not directly associated with cemetery visitation or cemetery maintenance by city personnel. 
(3)	Discharging of firearms with the exception of military funerals.
(4)	Creating a nuisance (i.e. inappropriate grave space decoration in violation of usual and customary cemetery allowances or protocol) or depositing of household trash or refuse matter in the cemetery common areas or dumpster facility. 
(5)	Damaging, defacing, removing or injuring in any way the trees, shrubs, flowers, tombstones, grave markers, monuments, seating, buildings, structures, signage, or any other relevant part of city cemetery infrastructure. 
(6)	Planting of trees or shrubs within the grave lots. Trees and shrubs are only allowed in designated landscape planting areas located in the common areas of the cemetery and shall be planted and maintained by the city. Any older trees or shrubbery plantings previously installed on grave lots prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be allowed to remain until such time they are declared a nuisance or endanger adjacent grave sites, monuments, or roadways, at which time they shall be removed by city personnel. 
(7)	Any other act deemed a violation of the adopted Code of Ordinances governing the safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Sec. 30-76. - Penalties. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable in the same manner as provided by local law for the punishment of violations of adopted ordinances and regulations contained in this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2008, § I)
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Emergencies, § 1.13(8).
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50.
State Law reference— Offenses against public order and safety, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-1 et seq.; administration of municipal government, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; state militia, O.C.G.A. § 38-2-1 et seq.; local organizations for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; local emergency management rules, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; emergency interim successors provided by political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50; interstate civil defense and disaster compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; calling out state militia during insurrection or invasion, O.C.G.A. § 45-12-28; emergency funds for local government, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-8.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare or economic well-being of the citizens of this state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of this state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011, et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of this state. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power including, without limitation, oil, gasoline and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 34-32. - Violations; penalties. 
It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by fine, not to exceed $500.00, and by imprisonment, not to exceed 90 days, or both, during an emergency to: 
(1)	Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps, any enforcement of a lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the virtue of this article. 
(2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil or delay the defense or protection of the city. 
(3)	Wear, carry or display without authority any mark of identification specified by the council of emergency management. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.080)
Sec. 34-33. - Emergency management director. 
There is created the office of emergency management director. Such officer shall be nominated by the state director of emergency management as provided by law. The emergency management director is charged to: 
(1)	Represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management.
(2)	Develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(3)	Obtain and utilize cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. 
(4)	Direct the services of all city emergency management forces during periods of emergency.
(5)	Obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and if required immediately, requisition same during periods of emergency. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.040)
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 34-34. - Council; membership. 
The Lavonia Council of Emergency Management is created and shall include the following: 
(1)	The mayor.
(2)	The emergency management director, as appointed, shall be executive vice chairman.
(3)	The police chief.
(4)	The fire chief.
(5)	The city health officer.
(6)	The county or city director of family and children services.
(7)	An American Red Cross representative.
(8)	Others, including representatives of business, labor and patriotic organizations as appointed by the council. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.020)
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-131 et seq. 
Sec. 34-35. - Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Lavonia Council of Emergency Management and it is empowered to: 
(1)	Develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(2)	Prepare and recommend for consideration by the city council ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)	Consider and recommend to the city council of emergency management for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(4)	Perform other duties as determined locally.
(Code 1995, § 2.28.030)
Sec. 34-36. - Emergency management corps generally. 
Officers and employees of the city with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law shall be charged with duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the city during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.050)
Sec. 34-37. - Divisions of the emergency management corps. 
The functions and duties of the Lavonia Emergency Management Corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a service chief appointed by the local director. The service chiefs will be selected from among the best qualified in the city and may include, but not be restricted to, chiefs of existing community services. Arranged within each division are the various emergency management services, each service under the direction of a chief designated to head this service due to his intimate knowledge of the particular service and his qualities as a leader. The divisions are as follows: 

 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.060)
Sec. 34-38. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, volunteering in service pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such service, they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.070)
Sec. 34-39. - Emergency measure declaration. 
This article is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of public business, health and safety and it shall take effect immediately. The chiefs of divisions shall prepare a complete and adequate emergency management plan, to include provisions for mutual aid agreements. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.090)
Sec. 34-40. - Conflicting provisions. 
Where provisions of this article are in conflict with provisions of existing local ordinances, the provisions of this article will govern and such provision of existing ordinances with which provisions of this article are in conflict are rescinded. 
(Code 1995, § 2.28.100) 
Chapter 38 - COURTS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Judicial branch, art. IV.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.
State Law reference— Courts, O.C.G.A. title 15; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 38-32. - Court costs. 
(a)	Defendants convicted in the municipal court of violating city ordinances shall, in addition to any penalty imposed for the violation, pay court costs. 
(b)	In addition a municipal court technology surcharge in the amount of $16.00 per offense for all municipal offenses except seatbelt violations, child restraint violations, and child safety violations shall be imposed by the municipal court. This surcharge shall be utilized exclusively for the operation of the municipal court and/or the police department. 
(Code 1995, § 2.24.020; Ord. of 4-5-2004, § I)
Sec. 38-33. - Appearance bonds may be required of defendants and certain witnesses; maximum amount. 
The judge may take bond with security, or bond without security, at his discretion, payable to the city for the appearance of any person accused of being guilty of a violation of any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city, to stand to and abide his trial before the municipal court, and also of witnesses required to testify in any case pending in the municipal court, when the witnesses do not reside in the city and have no permanent habitation. 
(Code 1995, § 2.24.030)
Sec. 38-34. - Forfeiture of appearance bond; grounds; procedure; collection; release of sureties. 
(a)	All appearance bonds taken pursuant to this article shall, upon the failure of any person to appear who is the principal in the bond, at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and a breach of such bond occurs, shall be subject to forfeiture by the judge in the same manner and under the rules and regulations as appearance bonds are forfeited in the superior court. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the city attorney to sue the principal and sureties on a forfeited appearance bond in the court having jurisdiction of the suit and subject matter and to collect the amount forfeited by judgment, execution and sale. 
(c)	The sureties on any forfeited appearance bond shall, at any time before final judgment, be relieved by payment of the costs and surrendering the principal until discharged by order of the court, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal shall discharge the surety or sureties of all further liability upon the bond if the delivery is made before any judgment of forfeiture upon the bond shall have been entered. 
(Code 1995, § 2.24.040)
Sec. 38-35. - Uniform Municipal Court rules. 
The city does hereby adopt for its municipal court the Uniform Municipal Court rules as the same exists or as may be amended. A copy of these rules is attached to the ordinance of October 3, 2011 as exhibit "A," and can be found on file with the city. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2011(1), § I)
Chapter 42 - ELECTIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Government structure, art. II; elections and removal, art. V.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; city council, § 2-30 et seq.
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.
Sec. 42-1. - Election district; polling place established. 
(a)	The area within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute the only election district for the city. 
(b)	Those persons living within the city shall vote at the city hall on Augusta Road.
(Code 1995, § 2.12.010) 
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Nuisance, § 1.13(21).
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; historic preservation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 82; suitability of land for subdivision, § 82-115; easements in subdivisions, § 82-127; utilities, ch. 98; water conservation, § 98-51 et seq.; zoning, ch. 102.
State Constitution reference—Authority for local stormwater systems and air quality control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— State grants to municipalities for water pollution control projects, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-33; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. title 41; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Disturbing noises. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against:
(1)	Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business.
(2)	Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience render it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)	The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1995, § 9.04.010)
Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 46-31. - Public nuisance defined. 
A public nuisance shall consist of all wrongs that arise from the unreasonable, unwarranted or unlawful use by a person of his own property, whether real or personal, or from his own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, causing an injury or wrong to the public and producing such a material disturbance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that it will produce some kind of danger. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-32. - Prohibited; penalty. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist in the city. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the remedies expressed in this article, violations may be punishable in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.080)
Sec. 46-33. - Nuisances enumerated. 
The following conditions are declared to be nuisances: 
(1)	Grass or other vegetation in a developed residential or commercial area of the city which exceeds an average of 18 inches in height, excluding trees, ornamental shrubbery or crops. 
(2)	Any trash, debris, garbage or unkept premises which could be an attraction to or harborage for rats or other rodents. 
(3)	Stagnant water which could be a breeding area for mosquitoes or otherwise be detrimental or disturbing to the public. 
(4)	Dead or decaying matter, animal, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable or living animal which is odorous or capable of causing disease or disturbance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(5)	The generation of dust, smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or disturbance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(6)	The pollution of public water or the injection of matter or rainwater into the public sewage system which would be damaging thereto. 
(7)	Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl.
(8)	Obstruction of a public street, public access area, highway or sidewalk without a permit from the city. The term "public access area," as used in this article, is defined to include all city parking places, either owned by the city or patrolled by the city pursuant to an agreement with the city and private owner, all public parks and all public recreational facilities. 
(9)	Loud or unusual noises, such as loud music or recreational activities, which are detrimental or disturbing to the public. 
(10)	Loud or excessive noises created by domestic animals or fowl in a residentially zoned area of the city. 
(11)	All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property.
(12)	Any business or building where illegal activities are conducted.
(13)	Abandoned, discarded, wrecked, scrapped, junked motor vehicles or parts thereof, resting on private property or other mechanical devices or discarded building materials, furniture or other debris, which are left outside in plain view of adjoining property or public right-of-way. 
(14)	Any trees, shrubbery, signs, plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(15)	Any building which is in violation of city, county or state building, housing or health regulations. 
(16)	Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law.
(17)	Accumulation on any property of debris, objects, materials or a condition which may constitute a health, accident or fire hazard, or which creates a blighting or deteriorating effect on the city. 
(18)	Scrap tires (defined as tires no longer suitable for the original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect) or wheels and rims in a number, condition, or stored in such a way that is not otherwise permitted by state statutes and regulations. 
(19)	The depositing of trash, debris, leaves, and grass clippings or the blowing of grass clippings with a blower into the streets, curb and gutters, storm water catch basins, or storm water collection system. The blockages of the catch basins or storm water collection system by trash and debris could result in flooding of the adjoining streets and/or personal property which may constitute a potential for causing personal injury or loss of life during heavy rain events. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.020; Ord. of 6-22-1998; Ord. of 3-14-2000, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-2010(3), § I; Ord. of 4-1-2013, § I) 
Sec. 46-34. - Creating or allowing nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on their lot, or a lot occupied by them, or to allow a nuisance to remain on a lot occupied by them. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.030; Ord. of 3-14-2000, § 2)
Sec. 46-35. - Improper sanitary facilities. 
Anyone who may allow any of his toilets, or other like facilities, to become in a condition which the laws of the city prohibit shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.040)
Sec. 46-36. - Noxious odors. 
Any person who shall operate any business or maintain any premises on which decaying animal or vegetable matter is kept, or from which noxious odors emanate, to the discomfort or disturbance of the public, shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.050)
Sec. 46-37. - Complaint; procedure. 
Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department or the city council. The police department or the city council may investigate the complaint and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, the city council shall issue written notice to the owner, agent in control, or tenant in possession stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within such time as the city council shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.060; Ord. of 3-14-2000, § 3)
Sec. 46-38. - Abatement by city. 
(a)	In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the city council, that it must be immediately abated, the city council may order appropriate city officials to abate the nuisance. The city officials in such case shall keep a record of the expenses and costs of abating the same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)	In addition to other remedies, the city council may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding in any court having jurisdiction to prevent violations of this article. 
(c)	Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1995, § 8.08.070; Ord. of 3-14-2000, § 4)
Secs. 46-39—46-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; planning, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 82.
Sec. 46-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Board means the state board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Department means the state department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
District means the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 46-72(a)(5). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device, such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Broad River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout streams are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any adjacent area subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-2))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-72. - Exemptions. 
(a)	This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968.
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying.
(3)	Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; however, construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 46-73. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 46-73 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
(5)	Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include:
a.	Those practices involving the establishment, cultivation or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; 
b.	The preparation and planting of pastureland;
c.	Farm ponds;
d.	Dairy operations;
e.	Livestock and poultry management practices; and
f.	The construction of farm buildings.
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; however, when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 46-73(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(8)	Any project involving 1.1 acres or less; however, this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters. For purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; however, any person responsible for a project which involves 1.1 acres or less which involves land disturbing activity and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located. Nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (a)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section. 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; however, such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 46-73; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of the state department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1. 
(10)	Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 46-73. 
(11)	Public water system reservoirs.
(b)	Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 46-73, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-3))
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 46-73. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)	Requirement of BMPs. The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)	Cut and fill operations must be kept to a minimum.
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented.
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property.
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)	Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on the site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(15)	Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; however, buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; however, any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure has been constructed; however, small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; however, any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed. 
(d)	More stringent requirements authorized. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)	Proof of violations. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-4))
Sec. 46-74. - Application/permit process. 
(a)	Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review chapter 82, pertaining to subdivisions, chapter 102, pertaining to zoning, the stormwater management ordinance, the flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city clerk and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. These plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 46-73. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)	A fee, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 46-73(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b. of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)	a.	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.	The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction of an acre of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements. 
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 46-73. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)	The following data are required for the site plan:
a.	Narrative or notes and other information, notes to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.	Description of existing land use at the project site and a description of the proposed project. 
c.	Name, address and phone number of the property owner.
d.	Name and phone number of a 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.	Size of the project, or phase under construction, in acres.
f.	Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.	Stormwater and sediment management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.	Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.	Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.	The following maintenance statement: "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)	Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.	Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north.
b.	Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets.
c.	Boundary line survey.
d.	Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary.
e.	Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following:

 
f.	Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.	Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas.
h.	Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.	Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable.
j.	Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(4)	Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)	Permits. 
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 46-73(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b. of this section are met, and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)	The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)	No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the city clerk certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-5))
Sec. 46-75. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)	The city or its authorized agent will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials; nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)	The district or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-6))
Sec. 46-76. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)	Failure to obtain permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop work orders. 
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; however, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)	All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 46-74(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part of the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. 
(1)	Except as provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section, any person who violates any provision of this article, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provision in any county charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)	The following penalties shall apply to land disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this article, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article: 
a.	There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy; and 
b.	There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (d)(2)a. of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-7))
Sec. 46-77. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-8))
Sec. 46-78. - Liability. 
(a)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)	The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)	No provision of this article shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2001, § 1(18-9(C))
Secs. 46-79—46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROTECTED TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS 

Sec. 46-111. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)	The mayor and council are enacting this article to promote and ensure public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation, maintenance, pruning, and removal of protected trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city limits while insuring the integrity of our natural green space. 
(b)	Therefore, the goals of this article are to:
(1)	Protect and replace significant trees in the city on public and right-of-way property.
(2)	Provide encouragement and expertise to private single-family residences for the protection and preservation of residential trees. 
(3)	Provide developers with tree requirements prior to issuance of permits and establish penalties for violations of the tree requirements set forth. 
(4)	Provide for the enforcement of this article.
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 1)
Sec. 46-112. - Applicability. 
(a)	The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to any activity which requires the issuance of a development permit. No development permit or grading permit shall be issued until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	This article applies to:
(1)	All public properties and rights-of-way;
(2)	Zones for which no tree protection and preservation has been approved;
(3)	An approved tree protection and preservation plan which is modified; and
(4)	Any activity which requires the issuance of a development permit.
(c)	This article does not apply to:
(1)	Tracts on which zoning ordinances impose no yard requirements and permit 100 percent coverage of the lot by buildings; 
(2)	Property already occupied by an owner as a single-family residence;
(3)	Public utilities and government agencies conducting activities to ensure uninterrupted utility and government services and unobstructed passage on public streets because of an emergency (submission of a tree plan by the utility or government agency is desirable when possible); 
(4)	Tree farms;
(5)	Approved public recreation areas or private recreation areas which have been issued a business license. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 2)
Sec. 46-113. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Covered area means total property area with principal and accessory buildings and including swimming pools, tennis courts, screened enclosures and paved areas. 
Dripline means an imaginary, perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
Landscaped area means total property area covered with any of the following or combination thereof: materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees, and other materials such as rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences. 
Park tree means any tree located within a public park or common area within the city. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity, and including all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others. 
Remove and removal mean the actual removal of a tree by digging up, cutting down or the effective removal through damage. 
Replacement tree means a tree of a species included on a list of acceptable replacement trees maintained by and being on the list of the state forestry commission. 
Shade coverage means the approximate area contained within the dripline of existing trees in a healthy condition. 
Specimen tree means a tree listed in section 46-137 (appendix A to this article) which has been determined to be of high value because of its size, type, age, or other professional criteria. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species which normally grows to an overall height of 15 feet or higher within this area of the state and which has an average spread of greater than 15 feet and which measures no less than six inches in diameter at four feet above average ground level. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 3)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-114. - Tree commission—Establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a tree commission for the city which shall consist of six members who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 4)
Sec. 46-115. - Same—Terms of office. 
The term of the six people appointed under this article shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members of the first commission shall be for one year and the term of two members of the first commission shall be for two years. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 5)
Sec. 46-116. - Same—Compensation. 
Members of the tree commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 6)
Sec. 46-117. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)	It shall be the responsibility of the tree commission to study, investigate, counsel, develop and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, and other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan. 
(b)	The commission shall promote and supervise the establishment of a tree inventory for street and park trees. The inventory shall be updated with the results of ground inspections every three years. 
(c)	The commission, when requested by the mayor and council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, and report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 7)
Sec. 46-118. - Same—Operation. 
The tree commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 8)
Sec. 46-119. - Tree species to be planted. 
The city tree commission develops and maintains a list of desirable trees for planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet), and large (over 40 feet). Efforts shall be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree species. Lists of native trees and trees not suitable for planting will also be created by the tree commission. See sections 46-137 and 46-138 (appendixes A (recommended) and B (not recommended) to this article). 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 9)
Sec. 46-120. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 46-119, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, 15 feet; medium trees, 25 feet; and large trees, 36 feet. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 10)
Sec. 46-121. - Distance from property lines. 
Trees shall have a ten-foot setback from the property line. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 11)
Sec. 46-122. - Distance from street corners and hydrants. 
No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs and curblines. No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 12)
Sec. 46-123. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species accepted as small trees by the city tree commission may be planted under, or within ten feet of, any overhead utility wire. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 13)
Sec. 46-124. - Public tree care. 
(a)	The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)	The city tree commission may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition due to damage by injurious fungus, insect, or other pest or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 14)
Sec. 46-125. - Pruning standards. 
All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the state forestry commission standards for tree care operations. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 15)
Sec. 46-126. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted, where appropriate. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the tree commission. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 16)
Sec. 46-127. - Pruning and corner clearance. 
(a)	Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not severely obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 15 feet above street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. 
(b)	Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the electric utility company in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. A utility tree trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility company and the city tree commission prior to any trimming by the utility company. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 17)
Sec. 46-128. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city tree commission will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by such owners at their expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of the failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of the removal to the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 18)
Sec. 46-129. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 19)
Sec. 46-130. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1)	The removal of trees from an owner-occupied, or being built for owner occupancy, single-family or duplex home. 
(2)	The removal of trees from horticultural properties such as farms, nurseries or orchards. This exception shall not be interpreted to include timber harvesting incidental to development of the land. 
(3)	The necessary removal of trees by a utility company within dedicated utility easements.
(4)	The removal of trees on public rights-of-way conducted by, on behalf of, or for any activity to be dedicated to a federal, state, county, municipal or other government agency in pursuit of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public rights-of-way. 
(5)	The removal of trees, other than specimen trees, from detention ponds and drainage easements. 
(6)	The removal of any tree which has become or threatens to become a danger to human life or property. 
(7)	The removal of trees from recreation areas such as public or private playgrounds, ball fields, golf courses and other such uses. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, all reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 20)
Sec. 46-131. - Protection of trees. 
(a)	In order to maintain the overall forest, reasonable efforts shall be made to replace trees that are removed and to protect quality trees that are endangered. 
(b)	Trees removed by the decision of the city tree commission or by natural causes shall be replaced somewhere in the forest on a one-for-one basis within one year. The location and species of any replacement tree shall be determined by the tree commission. See listed trees in specified heights, section 46-137 (appendix A to this article). Trees of desirable species and good health shall be protected as much as possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair, utilities work above and below ground, and other similar activities. The zone of protection shall include the ground beneath the canopy of the tree. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 21)
Sec. 46-132. - Proposed new subdivision/commercial development. 
A site plan must be presented outlining or describing trees in conflict with this article within the proposed development and replacement of such trees after the development is completed. The tree commission reserves the right to use its discretionary powers to limit the removal and also to be an advisor as to the number of trees that should be replaced and their locations. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 22)
Sec. 46-133. - Interference with tree commission. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city tree commission, or any of its agents, while it is engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 23)
Sec. 46-134. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street trees or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 24)
Sec. 46-135. - Review by mayor and council. 
The mayor and council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the city tree commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree commission to the mayor and council, who may hear the matter and make final decisions. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 25)
Sec. 46-136. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § 26)
Sec. 46-137. - Tree species, recommended. 
APPENDIX A 
LARGE TREES - OVER 40 FEET 
Eastern White Pine 
Loblolly Pine 
Shortleaf Pine 
Virginia Pine 
Eastern Hemlock 
Eastern Red Cedar 
Black Walnut 
Mockernut Hickory 
Pignut Hickory 
Eastern Cottonwood 
River Birch 
American Beech 
White Oak 
Post Oak 
Chestnut Oak 
Northern Red Oak 
Southern Red Oak 
Black Oak 
Willow Oak 
Water Oak 
Scarlet Oak 
Sugarberry 
Red Mulberry 
Southern Magnolia 
Umbrella Magnolia 
Yellow-Poplar 
Sassafras 
Sweetgum 
American Sycamore 
Black Cherry 
Red Maple 
Boxelder 
Blackgum 
Sourwood 
White Ash 
Green Ash 
Southern Catalpa 
Pinus strobus 
Pinus taeda 
Pinus echinata 
Pinus virginiana 
Tsuga canadensis 
Juniperous virginiana 
Juglan nigra 
Carya tomentosa 
Carya glabra 
Populus deltoides 
Betula nigra 
Fagus grandifolia 
Quercus alba 
Quercus stellata 
Quercus prinus 
Quercus rubra 
Quercus falcata 
Quercus velutina 
Quercus phellos 
Quercus nigra 
Quercus coccinea 
Celtis laevigata 
Morus rubra 
Magnolia grandiflora 
Magnolia tripetala 
Liriodendron tulipifera 
Sassafras albidum 
Liquidambar styraciflua 
Platanus occidentalis 
Prunus serotina 
Acer rubrum 
Acer negundo 
Nyssa sylvatica 
Oxydendrum arboreum 
Fraxinus americana 
Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Catalpa bignonioides 
MEDIUM TREES - 20 — 40 FEET 
Black Willow 
American Hornbean 
Eastern Hophornbean 
Winged Elm 
Georgia Hackberry 
Downy Serviceberry 
American Holly 
Flowering Dogwood 
Persimmon 
Carolina Silverbell 
Salix nigra 
Carpinus caroliniana 
Ostrya virginiana 
Ulmua alata 
Celtia tenuifolia 
Amelanchier arborea 
Ilex opaca 
Cornus florida 
Diospyros virginiana 
Halesia Carolina 
SMALL TREES - 20 FEET AND UNDER 
Downy Serviceberry 
Hawthorn 
Eastern Redbud 
Chalk Maple 
Painted Buckeye 
Amelanchier arborea 
Crataegus species 
Cercis canadensis 
Acer leucoderme 
Aesculus sylvatica 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, app. A)
Sec. 46-138. - Tree species, not recommended. 
APPENDIX B 
TREES NOT RECOMMENDED 
Longleaf Pine 
Slash Pine 
Pitch Pine 
Pond Pine 
Spruce Pine 
Table Mountain Pine 
Baldcypress 
White cedar 
Butternut 
Shagbark Hickory 
Shellbark Hickory 
Carolina Hickory 
Red Hickory 
Sand Hickory 
Bitternut Hickory 
Swamp Cottonwood 
Sweet Birch 
American Chestnut 
Allegheny chinkapin 
Overcup Oak 
Swamp Chestnut Oak 
Live Oak 
Shumard Oak 
Laural Oak 
Turkey Oak 
Blackjack Oak 
Georgia Oak 
Bluejack Oak 
American Elm 
Slippery Elm 
Cucumbertree 
Fraser Magnolia 
Sweetbay 
Honeylocust 
Black Locust 
Yaupon 
Daboon 
Florida Maple 
Water Tupelo 
Swamp Tupelo 
Pinus palustris 
Pinus elliottii 
Pinus rigida 
Pinus serotina 
Pinus glabra 
Pinus pungens 
Taxodium distichum 
Chamaecyparis thyoides 
Juglans cinerea 
Carya ovata 
Carya laciniosa 
Carya carolinae-septentrionalis 
Carya ovalis 
Carya pallida 
Carya cordiformis 
Populus heterophylla 
Betula lenta 
Castanea dentata 
Allegheny chinquapin 
Quercus lyrata 
Quercus michauxii 
Quercus virginiana 
Quercus shumardii 
Quercus laurifolia 
Quercus laevis 
Quercus marilandica 
Quercus georgiana 
Quercus incana 
Ulmus americana 
Ulmus rubra 
Magnolia acuminata 
Magnolia fraseri 
Magnolia virginiana 
Gleditsia triacanthos 
Robinia pseudoacacia 
Ilex vomitoria 
Ilex cassine 
Acer barbatum 
Nyssa aquatica 
Nyasa sylvatica var. biflora 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, app. B)
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire regulations, § 1.13(9); firefighting agency, § 1.13(24); codes of technical regulations, § 2.25.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 34.
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-89; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25; remedy of unsafe conditions upon failure to comply with court order, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-25; local ordinances, regulations or codes relating to fire prevention or protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; electronic security systems, installation, service, etc., by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; Georgia Firefighters' Pension Fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., of fire departments for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30.
Sec. 50-1. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
The International Fire Code of 2006, with amendments (a copy of which is on file in the City Hall of Lavonia, Georgia) as adopted by the state department of community affairs is adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 15.04.020; Ord. of 5-3-2010(4), § I)
Sec. 50-2. - False alarms. 
Any business or residence which has private monitoring devices (alarm systems), to which the fire department must respond, is allowed four false alarms in one calendar year after which a charge of $200.00 per call will be assessed. 
(Code 1995, § 8.12.010)
Chapter 54 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 46; planning, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the city council declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § I)
Sec. 54-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document approving a proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, which document must be obtained from the historic preservation commission before such material change may be undertaken. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 54-62. 
Historic property means a structure, site or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to the municipality, county, state or region for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)	It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era;
(2)	It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style;
(3)	It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the municipality, county, state or region; or 
(4)	It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any structure, site or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)	A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)	Demolition of a historic property;
(3)	Commencement of excavation;
(4)	A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on any historic property; or 
(5)	The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structures within a designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § II)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22. 
Sec. 54-3. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § VII)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-31. 
Secs. 54-4—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-131 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - Creation. 
There is created a commission the title of which shall be the "Lavonia Historic Preservation Commission." 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(A))
Sec. 54-32. - Commission position within the city. 
The historic preservation commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(B))
Sec. 54-33. - Members. 
The historic preservation commission shall consist of three voting members who are residents of the city, two nonvoting members who are not residents of the city and one nonvoting advisor. The members shall be appointed by the city council. All members shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the city, at least two members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. Members shall serve for three-year staggered terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(C))
Sec. 54-34. - Powers. 
The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)	Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)	Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, works of art or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)	Review applications for certificates of appropriateness and grant or deny such certificates in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28 and this article; 
(4)	Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, work of art or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)	Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city;
(6)	Promote the acquisition by the city of faï¿½ade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1—44-10-8); 
(7)	Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)	Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the city council or the historic preservation commission itself may from time to time deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)	Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)	Submit to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)	Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
(12)	Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the historic preservation commission; 
(13)	Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)	Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; 
(15)	Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council enter into agreements to do the same; 
(16)	Consult with historic preservation experts in the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; and 
(17)	Submit to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources or its successor a list of historic properties or historic districts designated as such pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(D))
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-25. 
Sec. 54-35. - Rules and standards. 
The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The historic preservation commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(E))
Sec. 54-36. - Conflict of interest. 
The historic preservation commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the city Charter. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(F))
Sec. 54-37. - Authority to receive funding from various sources. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(G))
Sec. 54-38. - Records. 
A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § III(H))
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-28(i). 
Secs. 54-39—54-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECOMMENDATIONS AND DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 102.
Sec. 54-61. - Preliminary research. 
(a)	Mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(b)	Power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The historic preservation commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(c)	Documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the historic preservation commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the historic preservation commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
(1)	A physical description.
(2)	A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance.
(3)	A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties. 
(4)	A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries.
(5)	Representative photographs.
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § IV(A))
Sec. 54-62. - Designation of a historic district. 
(a)	Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
(1)	Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest;
(2)	Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
(3)	Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(b)	Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(c)	Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
(1)	Contributing (contributes to the district).
(2)	Noncontributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section). 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § IV(B))
Sec. 54-63. - Designation of a historic property. 
A historic property is a building, structure, site or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the nation, city or the state, for one of the following reasons: 
(1)	It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era;
(2)	It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style;
(3)	It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historical or cultural significance to the city, state or the region; or 
(4)	It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § IV(C))
Sec. 54-64. - Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(a)	Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the historic preservation commission or: 
(1)	For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(2)	For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(b)	Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)	List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
(2)	Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties;
(3)	Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
(4)	Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(c)	Public hearings. The historic preservation commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(d)	Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the historic preservation commission must submit the report, required in section 54-61(c), to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources. 
(e)	Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the historic preservation commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(f)	City council action on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the historic preservation commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(g)	Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(h)	Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The historic preservation commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(i)	Moratorium on application for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § IV(D))
Secs. 54-65—54-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 54-91. - Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts involving historic properties. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(A))
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-27(a). 
Sec. 54-92. - Submission of plans. 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation required by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(B))
Sec. 54-93. - Interior alterations. 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(C))
Sec. 54-94. - Technical advice. 
The historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(D))
Sec. 54-95. - Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness; notices; right to be heard. 
The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and timeframe as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The historic preservation commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(E))
Sec. 54-96. - Acceptable commission reaction to applications. 
The historic preservation commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
(1)	Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The historic preservation commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions meet standards for design, scale, building material, setback and site features, and the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
(2)	Relocation. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure or object shall be guided by: 
a.	The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
b.	Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
c.	Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
d.	Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(3)	Demolition. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for demolition of buildings, structure, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
a.	The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
b.	The importance of the building, structure, site, tree or object to the ambiance of a district. 
c.	The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree or object because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location. 
d.	Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
e.	Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
f.	Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree or object from collapse. 
g.	Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(F))
Sec. 54-97. - Undue hardship. 
When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications for certificates of appropriateness, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to these provisions, or to interpret the meaning of these provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of these provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(G))
Sec. 54-98. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application. 
The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building, structure, site or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the historic preservation commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by the United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the historic preservation commission. Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within the 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(H))
Sec. 54-99. - Necessary action to be taken upon rejection of application. 
If the historic preservation commission rejects an application for a certificate of appropriateness, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The historic preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(I))
Sec. 54-100. - Requirement of conformance. 
All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. If the work is not performed in accordance with such certificate, the historic preservation commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. The city council or the historic preservation commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this division or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(J))
Sec. 54-101. - Void if construction not commenced. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(K))
Sec. 54-102. - Recording applications. 
The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the historic preservation commission's proceedings in connection with such applications. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(L))
Sec. 54-103. - Acquisition of property. 
The historic preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition, by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(M))
Sec. 54-104. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 54-98 or, in the case of a failure of the historic preservation commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the historic preservation commission action in section 54-98. The city council may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission, if the city council finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction of city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § V(N))
Secs. 54-105—54-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAINTENANCE OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND BUILDING AND ZONING CODE PROVISIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 102.
Sec. 54-131. - Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § VI(A))
Sec. 54-132. - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The historic preservation commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)	The historic preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings, which allow the elements and vermin to enter, and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)	If the historic preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the historic preservation commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)	If the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 54-3 and, at the direction of the city council, the historic preservation commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall by liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § VI(B))
Sec. 54-133. - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1999, § VI(C)) 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General health, safety and welfare, § 1.13(11); public peace, § 1.13(27).
Cross reference— City designated as bird sanctuary, prohibited acts enumerated, § 18-1; courts, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.
State Constitution reference—Limitations on special legislation, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV.
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. title 16; ordinances prohibiting loitering for prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; peeping Toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61; abandonment of containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.; adoption of municipal ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a).
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DAMAGE TO AND INTRUSION UPON PROPERTY 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Damaging, defacing graves or cemetery, § 30-31.
Sec. 62-31. - Damaging or defacing public or private property; posting show bills. 
It is unlawful for any person to write, paint, cut, carve or draw any letter or letters, work or works or device, or in any way mutilate or deface any church, public building, private house wall or fence belonging to another by pasting or posting up signs, pictures, advertisements or show bills without the consent of the owners thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 9.08.030)
Sec. 62-32. - Damaging, defacing or interfering with utilities equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut, interfere with, or deface any telephone, telegraph or electric light pole or fixtures, or any public property, or private property open to the public, within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 9.08.040)
Secs. 62-33—62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-61. - Public drunkenness giving rise to disorderly acts. 
It is unlawful for any person to be, or to appear to be, in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within curtilage of any private premises not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Code 1995, § 9.04.030)
Sec. 62-62. - Discharge of firearms, gas-operated guns or spring-loaded guns. 
(a)	It is unlawful to discharge any type of firearm, gas-operated gun, or spring-loaded gun in the city. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, firearms, gas operated guns, and spring loaded guns may be discharged in duly approved shooting ranges, provided such shooting ranges are located in areas zoned for shooting ranges. Shooting ranges are only permitted in the zoning classifications of B-2 (local business district) and B-3 (heavy industrial district). Before a business license is issued by Lavonia City Hall, the owner or applicant seeking to operate a shooting range must obtain approval from the city police department and the city council. The city police department will verify that the proposed operation is designed to be operated safely and make a recommendation to city council regarding its approval or disapproval of the proposed license application. 
(Code 1995, § 9.04.040; Ord. of 9-8-2009(1), § I)
Sec. 62-63. - Outdoor assemblies; permit required. 
(a)	Any person desiring to hold an outdoor meeting either on public or private property, or any person or group of persons desiring to form a procession or parade, except the military forces of the United States, the military forces of the state or the forces of the police and fire departments, and which meeting will occupy, march or proceed along any street or public sidewalk shall first secure a permit therefor which shall be issued by the chief of police, which permit shall be based on a written application filed with the chief of police at least five days prior to the happening of the event. The application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)	The name and address of the person desiring to hold the outdoor meeting or the name and address of the person in charge of the procession or parade. 
(2)	The date, time and place of the meeting, procession or parade, together with the proximate termination time and place thereof. 
(3)	The approximate number of persons expected to attend the meeting, procession or parade.
(4)	Any information that the chief of police should feel to be reasonable information necessary to provide adequate safety precautions and to provide sufficient protection for the general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)	The chief of police shall act upon such application within 48 hours after the filing thereof and shall mail a copy of his decision to the applicant. 
(c)	If the chief of police shall deny the application, any person aggrieved by such denial shall have the right of appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be made in writing to the mayor within 24 hours after receiving the notice of denial and the city council shall act on the appeal within two days from the date the appeal was filed with the mayor. 
(Code 1995, § 9.12.010)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
Secs. 62-64—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 

Sec. 62-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means a person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor or an emancipated minor. 
Curfew hours means the hours that a minor is not allowed on the streets of the city. 
Emancipated minor means any person under the age of 18 years who: 
(1)	Is or has been married or who is not under the care, custody and control of a parent, parents, guardian, person standing in locus parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)	Has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
Minor means any person 17 years of age or under. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent or stepparent of another. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access that includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Remain means to linger or stay, or fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator or the person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member, organ or mental faculty. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(a))
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-82. - Violations and penalties. 
Penalties for violation of this division are as follows: 
(1)	Upon conviction of violations of this division for the first time, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days or both. Any adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Except as otherwise provided, each violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)	Adjudication of violations of this division by minors shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 15 (O.C.G.A. § 15-1-1 et seq.) 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(f))
Sec. 62-83. - Curfew for persons 17 years of age or younger. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public places, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places or vacant lots in the city unless accompanied by an adult, parent or guardian having the lawful authority to be at such places during the following periods: 
(1)	11:00 p.m. Sunday night—6:00 a.m. Monday morning.
(2)	11:00 p.m. Monday night—6:00 a.m. Tuesday morning.
(3)	11:00 p.m. Tuesday night—6:00 a.m. Wednesday morning.
(4)	11:00 p.m. Wednesday night—6:00 a.m. Thursday morning.
(5)	11:00 p.m. Thursday night—6:00 a.m. Friday morning.
(6)	12:01 a.m. Friday night—6:00 a.m. Saturday morning.
(7)	12:01 a.m. Saturday night—6:00 a.m. Sunday morning.
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to knowingly, to negligently, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to be in or upon the public place, streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) of this section in the city during the curfew hours. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an establishment to knowingly, to negligently, or by insufficient control, to allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city during the curfew hours. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(b))
Sec. 62-84. - Offenses. 
A minor commits an offense if he violates any of the terms and conditions of this division. A parent or a guardian of a minor commits an offense if they violate any of the terms and conditions of this division. An owner, operator or employee of an establishment commits an offense if they violate any of the terms and conditions of this division. It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the city police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(c))
Sec. 62-85. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply in the following situations: 
(1)	When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(2)	When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor, or if such minor is seeking medical treatment. 
(3)	When the minor is returning directly home from or is engaging in a school sponsored or religious organization sponsored activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance. 
(4)	When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referred to in this section during the prescribed period of time. 
(5)	When the minor is in a motor vehicle, with parental consent, for normal travel.
(6)	When the minor is an emancipated minor as defined in this division or as may be provided for in O.C.G.A. title 29 or other law. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(d))
Sec. 62-86. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a city police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstance, no exception listed in section 62-85 is present. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2000(1), § 9.04.060(g)) 
Chapter 66 - PERSONNEL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Retirement, § 1.13(31); position classification and pay plans, § 3.16; personnel policies, § 3.17.
Cross reference— Any ordinance fixing salaries of city officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(4); any ordinance consistent with this Code establishing personnel policies and procedures or a retirement plan for the city employees, and amendments thereto saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(13); administration, ch. 2; ethics, principals and pledges, § 2-31; drug-free workplace, § 2-61; code of ethics, § 2-101 et seq.
State Constitution reference—Retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Compensation and benefits for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; residence of municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5 et seq.
Sec. 66-1. - Employee handbook. 
The city's employee handbook, as now or hereafter amended, is adopted as a part of this section as if set out at length in this section. 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning, § 1.13(23).
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 46; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 46-71 et seq.; historic preservation, ch. 54; recommendations and designation of historic districts and properties, § 54-61 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 82; conformance of subdivision plat to major street plan, § 82-112; conformance of subdivisions to master plan, § 82-119; street names in subdivisions, § 82-120; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Constitution reference—Adoption of local plans authorized, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV.
State Law reference— Redevelopment Law, O.C.G.A. § 8-4-1 et seq.; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive local planning, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; development impact fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-131 et seq.; zoning, ch. 102.
Sec. 70-31. - Established; purposes. 
In order to guide and accomplish coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Lavonia Planning and Zoning Board is created and established. 
(Code 1995, § 2.20.010)
Sec. 70-32. - Composition; appointment and removal of members; terms; filling vacancies; compensation. 
(a)	The planning and zoning board shall consist of five members. The members shall be residents of the city, appointed by the city council. The terms of the members of the planning and zoning board shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council. 
(b)	The city council shall have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)	All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expense incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1995, § 2.20.020; Ord. of 5-3-2010(5), § I)
Sec. 70-33. - Organization. 
The planning and zoning board shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be for one year, or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The planning and zoning board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city council or of the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 2.20.030)
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Garbage fees, § 1.13(10); solid waste disposal, § 1.13(34); service charges, § 6.15.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 98.
State Constitution reference—Local garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local solid waste management regulations, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; local comprehensive solid waste management plan, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; cost reimbursement fees and surcharges, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; local restrictions on disposal of tires, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; local and regional solid waste management authorities, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq.; Litter Control Law, § 16-7-40 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Littering. 
No person shall willfully litter any public road or right-of-way with any trash, tin can, garbage, rubbish, dead animal, discarded material, sand, gravel, slag or brickbat, or similarly litter the lands or waters of another without first having obtained his permission. 
(Code 1995, § 9.08.010)
Sec. 74-2. - Grass clipping policy. 
Effective immediately, all residential grass clippings must be bagged using heavy duty lawn trash bags and placed at the curbside for pick up and disposal by city crews. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2011(2))
Secs. 74-3—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION; DISPOSAL 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Containers means such garbage containers as shall be provided by the city. 
Garbage means and includes any and all kitchen refuse, rejected or waste food, meats, fish, fowl, offal, carrion or anything whatsoever unsanitary or dangerous to health, tree limbs, leaves and recyclables. 
Waste material means and includes sand, wood, stone, brick, cement, concrete, roofing and other refuse building materials usually left over from a construction or remodeling project, and trees, tree limbs, tree trunks and tree stumps; also the waste products of industrial plants. 
White goods means furniture and appliances. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-32. - Penalty. 
A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.200; Ord. of 2-7-2000(2), § 2)
Sec. 74-33. - Requirements for vehicles transporting garbage. 
Any vehicle used to transport garbage upon the streets of the city shall be so constructed and equipped as to prevent the escape of any of the contents of the vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.020)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 74-34. - Garbage containers to be provided. 
Each owner, tenant or occupant of a residence, apartment or a place of business within the city is required to provide a container of sufficient capacity to hold seven days' accumulation of garbage in the residential areas, and as many containers as the city council may require in the business and commercial areas. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.030)
Sec. 74-35. - Disposition of garbage. 
All garbage shall be deposited daily in containers. Garbage containers shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when it is necessary to lift the cover to deposit garbage in the container. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.040)
Sec. 74-36. - Unlawful accumulations. 
It is unlawful to deposit or dump or accumulate or suffer or allow or permit garbage, refuse, trash or waste material as defined in this chapter, to accumulate upon any premises or public street or public alley within the city and any accumulation of garbage, refuse, trash or waste material on any premises, any street, alley or premises within the city is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. All garbage or refuse shall be deposited in cans described in this chapter and said cans shall be emptied not less than once a week. All waste material shall be disposed of in a sanitary landfill in accordance with applicable local, state and federal regulations. In prohibiting the use of waste material above, it is the specific intention of this section that the use of waste material as a substitute for adequate amounts of fill dirt on improved and unimproved real property be prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.050; Ord. of 2-7-2000(2), § 1; Ord. of 11-3-2003(1), § I)
Sec. 74-37. - Location of garbage containers. 
(a)	All containers shall be kept in a location within the lot line adjacent to the alley and within easy reach, or, where there is no access to the alley, at some other proper and accessible place within easy reach of the garbage collector. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person not a resident of the city to deposit any garbage within any container for the purpose of collecting garbage in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.060)
Sec. 74-38. - Unlawful disposition of garbage; special agreements. 
It is unlawful to deposit garbage upon any vacant or unoccupied premises or upon any street, alley, pond, pool or lake within the city. No leaves or limbs shall be burned on premises unless a written permit for such burning is first secured from the chief of the fire department of the city or his duly authorized agent. Whenever or wherever there exists exceptional conditions of ownership, tenancy, occupancy or use affecting the collection of garbage and the collection of the rates and charges imposed in this article or resulting in heavy accumulation or necessitating frequent collections of garbage, the city clerk, with the approval of the city council, is authorized to enter into agreements with the owner or occupant of the premises as to the proper charges to be paid by such owner or occupant, which charges shall be made as nearly uniform as practical and proportionate to other charges for similar services set forth in this section. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.070)
Sec. 74-39. - Disposition of waste materials. 
Waste materials resulting from the construction, alteration, repair or demolition of buildings or structures must be removed by the owner or the person performing such work. Waste products of industrial plants and spent oils or greases accumulated at garages, filling stations or similar establishments must likewise be removed by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.090)
Sec. 74-40. - Disposition of hazardous substances. 
It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any combustible, inflammable or other hazardous substance, unless such disposition is made under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.100)
State Law reference— Transportation of biohazardous materials, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1. 
Sec. 74-41. - City to collect garbage; permit required for private collectors. 
The city, by and through its proper departments, or its contractors or subcontractors, shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage within the city, and no person shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any garbage without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.110)
Sec. 74-42. - Limbs and leaves not to be in streets; size and weight of bundles. 
All limbs and leaves shall be kept off of the streets and shall be cut into such size and bundled into such weight as may be conveniently handled by one person. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.120)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
Sec. 74-43. - Frequency of collection. 
Garbage shall be collected from the various premises in the city by the proper department of the city as follows: 
(1)	Collections from residential premises shall be made once weekly.
(2)	Collections from business or commercial premises designated as commercial class A shall be made once or twice weekly, depending on need. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.130(A), (B))
Sec. 74-44. - Monthly sanitary and health charge imposed; persons liable; white goods. 
(a)	In order to defray the cost and expense of providing for the collection of garbage, a monthly sanitary and health fee shall be as referred to in section 2-191 and shall be assessed against the owner or occupant of each improved premises within the city. Each occupant of an improved premises shall be liable for the payment of the monthly charge to the city, but if for any reason the occupant of an improved premises shall fail to pay the monthly charge to the city, then the owner of the improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. 
(b)	An additional charge shall be required for the collection of white goods.
(Code 1995, § 8.04.140)
Sec. 74-45. - Payment of monthly sanitary and health charge; due date; inclusion with water bill; white goods. 
(a)	The monthly sanitary and health charge for each premises to which the city supplies water service shall be billed with the water bill and collected in the same manner and at the same time as water service is billed and collected. The monthly sanitary and health charge for all premises to which the city does not supply water service shall be billed and collected monthly by the 15th day of each month and shall be payable by the occupant or the owner. 
(b)	Charges for the collection of white goods shall be billed and collected as determined by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.170)
Sec. 74-46. - Evasion of monthly charge. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed on the premises of another, with or without the permission of any other person, any garbage for the purpose of avoiding payment of the monthly sanitation and health charge. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.180)
Sec. 74-47. - Termination of water and sanitary services, and white goods collection for nonpayment of charges. 
Any person failing or refusing for any reason to pay the monthly sanitary and health charge, or any charge for the collection of white goods imposed by this article, after having been duly billed for the charge by the city, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, in addition to other penalties, all sanitary and health services and water service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 8.04.190)
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public improvements, § 1.13(26); roadways, § 1.13(32); special assessments, § 6.16; sale of city property, § 6.31.
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(7); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(8); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(9); any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes or providing for the levying or collecting of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; cemeteries, ch. 30; environment, ch. 46; outdoor assemblies; permit required, § 62-63; planning, ch. 70; limbs and leaves not to be in streets; size and weight of bundles, § 74-42; subdivisions, ch. 82; street names in subdivisions, § 82-120; dead-end or cul-de-sac streets in subdivisions, § 82-122; alleys in subdivisions, § 82-123; telecommunications, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Constitution reference—Street construction and maintenance, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, etc., O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-43, 32-6-1, 36-30-10; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. title 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. title 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; subdivisions abutting on state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; franchises in streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); streets and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street and sidewalk improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Structures in public ways. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain, or to cause to be erected, constructed or maintained, any building, posts, steps, fence, pipe or other obstruction, or nuisance, in or on the public grounds, streets, sidewalks, crosswalks, avenues, alleys, lanes or other public ways in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 12.04.010(A))
Sec. 78-2. - Displays of merchandise prohibited; removal; costs. 
(a)	No person shall obstruct any street, sidewalk, alley, municipal parking lot or other public place by the exposing, exhibiting or storing of any goods, commodities, merchandise or other articles on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, municipal parking lots or any other public place. 
(1)	Any merchandise, goods, commodities or other articles displayed, exhibited or stored on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, municipal parking lots or other public places must be adjacent to the building and there must be at least 48 inches of unobstructed pedestrian access. 
(b)	Any such obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) of this section upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, municipal parking lots or other public property shall be removed by the chief of police whenever so ordered by the city council and if the removal is attended with any expense, the expense shall be defrayed by the person so obstructing the same. Any person placing obstructions or hindering or preventing the chief of police in the execution of any duty under this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1995, § 12.04.020; Ord. of 7-5-2011(2), § I)
Sec. 78-3. - Damaging street markers. 
It is unlawful for any person to hack, cut, saw, mark, disfigure, or interfere in any manner with any street markers or notices erected within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 12.04.030)
Sec. 78-4. - City council to approve plans for excavations. 
No excavations shall be made in any of the streets of the city for the purpose of laying gas, water or sewer pipes therein or for any other purpose, until the plans therefor have been submitted to and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 12.04.040)
Sec. 78-5. - Discharge of water from cooling systems. 
No person shall cause any water used in the operation of a cooling system for any business operated in the city to be discharged upon any streets or alleys in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 12.04.050)
Sec. 78-6. - Operation of skateboards, roller skates or other wheeled vehicles on public property. 
(a)	Prohibited. 
(1)	No person shall operate or cause to be operated a skateboard, roller skates, other skates, or any wheeled vehicle intended and designed to be propelled by a foot on the vehicle at the time of initial propulsion on city property, to include sidewalks, ramps, parking lots and medians within the area designated as Exhibit A, on file in the office of the city clerk. This area specifically includes the B-1 downtown central business district as well as the sidewalks within the corporate limits of the city adjacent to Georgia Highway 17, Georgia Highway 59, Georgia Highway 77, and the pedestrian/bicycle pathway on Bear Creek Road. 
(2)	In addition no person shall operate a bicycle or other wheeled vehicle on the sidewalks within the B-1 central business district as defined by the current zoning map of the city (a schematic of the area is attached as Exhibit B to the ordinance from which this section derives and is on file in the office of the city clerk). 
(b)	Exceptions. The prohibitions in this section do not apply to wheelchairs or baby strollers or wheeled vehicles that are pushed or pulled. 
(Ord. of 6-5-2006, § I)
Sec. 78-7. - Time limits on parking in the Central Business District. 
(a)	There shall be established a two-hour time limit from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, for vehicular parking in designated parking spaces located in front of all storefronts located on Grogan Street, East Main Street, West Main Street, West Avenue, Jones Street Extension, and Bowman Street Extension in the downtown Central Business District. 
(b)	Provided that subsection (a) above is subject to the following exception:
(1)	A permit shall be issued to each store owner or store lessee for one parking space where the owner or lessee may park without a time limitation. Said permit shall be issued by the city at no fee and shall be displayed in the vehicle on the dash or rear view mirror while parked in the parking space. 
(2)	The two-hour time limitation shall not apply to parking spaces located in areas other than described in subsection (a) above, i.e. parking spaces against the railroad on West Main Street, center island on West Main Street, adjacent to the railroad on East Main Street, or any municipal parking lot. 
(c)	There shall be imposed a fine of $25.00 per occurrence for all parking violations in the Central Business District as described by subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(2), § I)
Sec. 78-8. - "long-term" parking (greater than 24 hours) prohibited. 
(a)	No vehicle shall be parked in any designated parking space "long-term" (greater than 24 hours) by any business or private individual on any city street or city municipal parking lot located within the downtown Central Business District. 
(b)	Any vehicle found to be in violation of subsection (a) shall be removed by the police chief and the owner(s) shall be responsible for any and all costs associated with this police action. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011(2), § I)
Secs. 78-9—78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 78-41—78-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REPAIRS; IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 78-61. - Approval of city council required. 
No person shall repair, improve or in any way affect any existing city-owned sidewalks in the city without first securing approval from the city council. 
(Code 1995, § 12.08.010)
Sec. 78-62. - Supervision of the city required. 
All repair work or improvement of any existing city-owned sidewalks in the city shall be done under the supervision of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 12.08.020)
Chapter 82 - SUBDIVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Subdivision regulation, § 1.13(23).
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(10); buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 46; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 46-71 et seq.; planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 98; county public health department to approve sewerage systems in subdivisions, § 98-90; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Entry of approval of subdivision plat prior to recording, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); procedures for approval of subdivision plats, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; subdivision of areas proposed to be incorporated, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-4; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1995, § 16.04.020)
Sec. 82-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to: 
(1)	Encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community;
(2)	Ensure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(3)	Ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
(4)	Ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments to the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)	Ensure, in general, the wise development of areas in harmony with the master plan of the community; and 
(6)	Secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance both of the subdivider and the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.04.030)
Sec. 82-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Lot includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
Master plan (same as comprehensive plan) means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the planning and zoning board. 
Street means, relates to, and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys and other ways. For the purpose of this chapter, streets are classified by function as follows: 
(1)	Collector street means those streets which serve as feeders to a major street, as collectors of traffic from minor streets, and for circulation around a residential neighborhood. 
(2)	Cul-de-sac means a dead-end street where there is room for a vehicle to turn at a circular end. 
(3)	Major street means those indicated as such on the major street plan map, which serve primarily as major trafficways for travel through and within the city. 
(4)	Minor street means those streets provided for the primary purpose of furnishing access to abutting properties. 
Subdivider means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity (or agent therefor) that undertakes the activities covered by the regulations of this chapter. Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of ensuring a satisfactory development, the term "subdivider" is intended to include the terms "developer" and "builder" even though the persons involved in successive stages of the project may vary. 
Subdivision means a division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement, sale, legacy or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or areas subdivided; however, the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(2)	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved.
Used and occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the term "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Code 1995, §§ 16.08.010, 16.08.020)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 82-4—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 82-31. - Preapplication consultation. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the city is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the planning and zoning board. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. The purpose of the preapplication review is to facilitate the subsequent preparation of plans, and no fees are charged for this review. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.010)
Sec. 82-32. - Submission of plat. 
Following the preapplication consultation of a proposed land subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the planning and zoning board the following: 
(1)	The preliminary plat and other documents as specified in this chapter.
(2)	A letter requesting review and approval of the preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of a hearing by the planning and zoning board on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.020(A), (B))
Sec. 82-33. - Review of preliminary plat. 
The planning and zoning board shall review the preliminary plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this chapter and the requirements of chapter 102, pertaining to zoning, and shall take into consideration the general requirements of the community and the best use of the land to be subdivided. The preliminary plat may be approved, disapproved or approved subject to modifications. The board may indicate the specific changes required, and the public improvements which must be provided as required by this chapter, or the amount of the performance bond therefor which it will require as a prerequisite to the approval of the final plat. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.030)
Sec. 82-34. - Notice and hearing on preliminary plat. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a hearing on the preliminary plat within 30 days of submission, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning and zoning board by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. If action is not taken within 30 days of the date of submission, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval issued on demand. The subdivider may waive the 30-day time limit and consent to an extension of time. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.040)
Sec. 82-35. - Tentative and conditional nature of preliminary plat. 
Tentative and conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the planning and zoning board and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of the regulations of this chapter and the stipulations in the conditional approval, if any. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.050)
Sec. 82-36. - Expiration of tentative approval of preliminary plat. 
The tentative approval of a preliminary plat shall expire after six months unless an extension of time is granted by the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.060)
Sec. 82-37. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Number of copies. Three copies of the preliminary plat shall be furnished by the subdivider: one copy to be retained in the files of the planning and zoning board, one copy to be reviewed by appropriate city and county officials and the postmaster, and one copy to be returned to the subdivider. 
(2)	Form. The preliminary plat shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. The sheet size shall be not less than 16 inches by 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(Code 1995, § 16.12.070)
Sec. 82-38. - Data required on preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and acreage to be subdivided.
(2)	Name and address of owner of record, subdivider and owners of adjoining property.
(3)	Date and north point.
(4)	Contours at an interval of not greater than five feet and such street cross sections and profiles as may be required by the planning and zoning board. 
(5)	Exact boundaries of the tract to be subdivided by distances and bearings.
(6)	Existing and proposed easements and their approximate location, width and distances.
(7)	Names and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and alleys on and adjacent to the tract. 
(8)	Location and type of existing and proposed sewerage and storm drainage and water supply facilities and other utilities on or adjacent to the tract, showing proposed connections. 
(9)	Lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot numbers.
(10)	Sites, green space and buffers, if any, and their acreages, to be reserved or dedicated for public uses. 
(11)	Present zoning classification.
(Code 1995, § 16.12.080(A)—(K))
Secs. 82-39—82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 82-71. - Certificates of completion. 
After tentative approval of the preliminary plat and before approval of the final plat, there shall be filed with the planning and zoning board by the building inspector and all other departments of the city and county concerned with the requirements of subdivisions, certificates as to the satisfactory completion of all improvements required, and for any requirements not so completed, a certificate by the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the bond offered in lieu thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.010)
Sec. 82-72. - Procedure for final plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the planning and zoning board the following: 
(1)	The final plat and other documents as specified in this chapter.
(2)	A letter requesting review and approval of the final plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of a hearing by the planning and zoning board on the final plat shall be sent. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.020)
Sec. 82-73. - Review of final plat. 
The planning and zoning board shall review the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and with the rules and regulations of this chapter. The final plat may be approved, disapproved or approved subject to modifications. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.030)
Sec. 82-74. - Notice of hearing on final plat. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a hearing on the final plat within 30 days of submission, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning and zoning board by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter and on the plat, requesting review and approval, not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. After the hearing, notation of the action taken shall be made on each of three required copies of the final plat. If action is not taken within 30 days of the date of submission, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval issued on demand. The subdivider may waive the 30-day limit and consent to an extension of time. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated in the records of the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.040)
Sec. 82-75. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat, with the signature of the secretary of the planning and zoning board thereon, the developer shall have the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall have responsibility for payment of the recording fee. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.050)
Sec. 82-76. - Final plat specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and certain additional specifications as follows: 
(1)	Exact location and description of monuments.
(2)	Exact locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
(3)	Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii and lengths of tangents. 
(4)	Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth and bearings.
(5)	Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically.
(6)	Locations and dimensions of all improvements constructed or installed.
(7)	Private covenants or restrictions, if any, shall either be recorded on the final plat or on an identified document attached to the final plat. 
(Code 1995, § 16.16.060)
Secs. 82-77—82-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 82-111. - Conformance to standards required. 
Subdividers shall observe the general requirements and design standards of land subdivision pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.010)
Sec. 82-112. - Conformance to major street plan. 
All streets and other features of the major street plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimensions indicated on the major street plan adopted by the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.020)
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70. 
Sec. 82-113. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)	When a proposed school site or other public building site, park or other land for public uses is located in whole or in part in the subdivision, the planning and zoning board may require that, as a prerequisite to plat approval, such sites shall be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition by the appropriate public agency. 
(b)	Areas for parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be of reasonable size. No arbitrary percentage of areas shall be insisted upon by the planning and zoning board but, in general, developers should set aside not less than the minimum amount of the area required by state rules and regulations for these purposes. 
(c)	Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning and zoning board finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning and zoning board shall refuse to approve the plat. 
(d)	The approval of a plat by the planning and zoning board shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of the dedication of any street or other grounds shown upon the plat. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.030)
Sec. 82-114. - Subdivision names. 
The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any other subdivision within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.040)
Sec. 82-115. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the planning and zoning board to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.050)
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46. 
Sec. 82-116. - Large parcels. 
In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical future resubdivisions. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.060)
Sec. 82-117. - Lots. 
Lots shall front upon a public street. Lot lines shall be generally perpendicular or radial to street lines. Lot dimensions shall meet the requirements of chapter 102, pertaining to zoning, for the district or districts in which the subdivision is located. Corner lots shall be increased in size wherever necessary so as to provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the minimum setback line of each street as required in chapter 102. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.070)
Sec. 82-118. - Blocks. 
The length of blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400 feet and the width sufficient to provide for two tiers of lots, but irregularly shaped lots indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed, and provision made for maintenance of interior parks. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.080)
Sec. 82-119. - Conformance to master plan. 
The arrangements of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for their proper projection when adjoining property has not yet been subdivided, and, in general, conform to the master plan. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.090)
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70. 
Sec. 82-120. - Street names. 
Street names within subdivisions shall require the approval of the planning and zoning board. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.100)
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
Sec. 82-121. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs within subdivisions with centerline of offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.110)
Sec. 82-122. - Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets. 
Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets within subdivisions shall not be greater in length than 500 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 50 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.120)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
Sec. 82-123. - Alleys. 
Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in one-family and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning and zoning board of the need for alleys. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.130)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78. 
Sec. 82-124. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall not be permitted within subdivisions unless the control is placed in the hands of the city council under conditions approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.140)
Sec. 82-125. - Street intersections. 
Street intersections within subdivisions shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees unless required by unusual circumstances. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.150)
Sec. 82-126. - Curb radii. 
Curb radii at street intersections within subdivisions shall be at least 25 feet. Where the angle of a street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a radius of at least 30 feet shall be required. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.160)
Sec. 82-127. - Easements. 
Easements across lots or centered rear or side lot lines within subdivisions shall be provided where necessary for utilities or drainage. 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.170)
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 98. 
Sec. 82-128. - Geometric standards and other requirements of streets. 
The following are geometric standards and other street requirements within subdivisions: 

 
(Code 1995, § 16.20.180)
Secs. 82-129—82-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 82-161. - Preliminary plat approval required. 
Construction of improvements shall not commence until the preliminary plat has been approved. 
(Code 1995, § 16.24.010)
Sec. 82-162. - Improvements installed by subdivider. 
The subdivider shall be required to install or have installed at his expense the following improvements: 
(1)	Monuments. Two concrete monuments at least 36 inches in length and four inches square with a suitable center point at each street intersection on the right-of-way line, and iron pin monuments three-fourth inches in diameter and 24 inches long at all points on boundary lines of lots where there is a change in direction, and all lot corners. 
(2)	Streets. At least 1½ inches of hot plant mix asphalt on a base of at least seven inches of stabilized gravel or eight inches of crushed limestone, or equivalent. No final grading or paving of the street, or construction or installation of utilities in the bed of a street shall be permitted until the grade has been officially established. No paving shall begin until the compacted base has been inspected and approved by the official representative of the city and underground utilities installed and approved. 
(3)	Water mains. Where a public water main is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point, the subdivider shall connect with such water main. In such cases, mains of at least six inches shall be required. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all taps and extensions to existing municipal facilities. Where a public water main is not reasonably accessible as determined by the planning and zoning board, the subdivider shall provide an individual water supply according to the standards of the appropriate agency. 
(4)	Sanitary sewers. Wherever a public sanitary sewer is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point and connection by gravity flow is feasible, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide a connection for each lot. The size of the mains shall be at least eight inches. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all taps, lift pump stations, manholes and extensions to existing municipal facilities. Where sanitary sewers are not available, an oxidation pond, septic tank or other disposal device designed and installed according to standards of the appropriate agency may be permitted. 
(5)	Storm sewers. Storm sewers, catchbasins and traps shall be provided in each subdivision. They shall be designed to carry not less than the stormwater from a rainfall expected to occur once in ten with a runoff factor of 90 percent for pavements and buildings and a variable runoff factor depending on the topography of the ground for other areas. Storm drainage design shall be in compliance with rule 391-3-6-.16 of the rules of the state environmental protection division (Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. r 391-3-6-.16) and other applicable rules. 
(6)	Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be mandatory in all subdivisions. 
(Code 1995, § 16.24.020)
Sec. 82-163. - Variances or other improvements. 
Where the subdivider can show that a provision of the regulations of this chapter would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning and zoning board a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning and zoning board may authorize a variance. Likewise, if because of peculiar conditions or circumstances relative to a particular subdivision, the planning and zoning board may require the installation of sidewalks, street trees or other improvements. Any variance thus authorized or additional improvement thus required is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning and zoning board with the reasoning on which the variance or addition was justified set forth. 
(Code 1995, § 16.24.030)
Sec. 82-164. - Street name markers. 
Street name markers shall be provided at the corners of all street intersections within subdivisions. 
(Code 1995, § 16.24.040)
Sec. 82-165. - Fire hydrants. 
One fire hydrant shall be required within 1,000 feet of each residence or other structure measured over streets within subdivisions, and at any other locations designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1995, § 16.24.050)
Secs. 82-166—82-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.
Sec. 82-201. - Plat approval. 
Any subdivision that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be disapproved by the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.010)
Sec. 82-202. - Recording of plats. 
No plat of a subdivision lying within the corporate limits of the city shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it has been given final approval by the planning and zoning board and the description by metes and bounds on the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such requirements. The recording of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning and zoning board shall be a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or imprisonment in the city prison or compulsory labor on the public streets or public works of the city not to exceed 60 days, and any one or more of such punishments may be imposed. Each offense shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation occurs. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.020)
Sec. 82-203. - Sale or transfer of lots. 
The subdivider of any land within the city who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the planning and zoning board and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court shall be a violation and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or imprisonment in the city prison or compulsory labor on the public streets or public works of the city not to exceed 60 days, and any one or more of such punishments may be imposed. Each offense shall constitute a separate offense for each day such violation occurs. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.030)
Sec. 82-204. - Acceptance of streets. 
No public authority shall accept, improve or maintain any street not shown on an approved and recorded final plat unless such street has received the legal status of a public street. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.040)
Sec. 82-205. - Building permit. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to such lots is a public street. Any building erected in violation of the provisions of this chapter is an unlawful structure and the building inspector, city attorney or other agent of the city shall enjoin such erection or cause the building to be vacated or removed. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.050)
Sec. 82-206. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the provisions of this chapter specify more restrictive standards than required by any other ordinance provision or statute, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance provision or statute require more restrictive standards, the provisions of such ordinance provision or statute shall govern. 
(Code 1995, § 16.28.060) 
Chapter 86 - TAXATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxes, § 1.13(37), (38); finance, art. VI.
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(2); any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(9); any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes or providing for the levying or collecting of ad valorem taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(12); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-161 et seq.; excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, § 10-111 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; occupation tax, § 26-31 et seq.; tax levied on telephone companies, § 90-32.
State Constitution reference—Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV.
State Law reference— Local taxation of insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 et seq.; uniform property tax administration and equalization, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-260 et seq.; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; administration of local taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380 et seq.; tax for maintaining independent school systems, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-405; franchises, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-420 et seq.; local taxation of rooms, lodgings or accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Contracts for assessing and collecting property taxes. 
The City of Lavonia may as it deems appropriate enter into intergovernmental contracts for the assessment and collection of ad valorem taxes on real and personal property. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2010(6), § I)
Secs. 86-2—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-161 et seq.
Sec. 86-31. - Persons acquiring property to give notice to clerk. 
(a)	It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation purchasing or receiving real estate, or any interest in and to any real property located within the city to fail to register with the city clerk and the county board of tax assessors within 30 days from the date of the purchase or receipt, written notice of the real estate or interest so purchased or received. 
(b)	Any person purchasing or receiving real estate shall give to the city clerk and the county board of tax assessors the name of the seller or sellers, the number of the lot and block, the number of acres purchased and the location of the real estate. 
(Code 1995, § 3.04.020; Ord. of 5-3-2010(6), § II)
Sec. 86-32. - Due date; nonpayment. 
The due date for all city ad valorem property taxes shall be determined each year by the mayor and council. Ad valorem property taxes shall be paid prior to the due date for the year in which they are due. In the event of nonpayment on or before the due date each year, then the city may pursue collection of delinquent ad valorem property taxes in the manner provided by applicable state law for the levy, execution and/or sale of real and personal property for taxes due municipalities. 
(Code 1995, § 3.04.010; Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 1)
Sec. 86-33. - Tax lien foreclosures. 
The procedures for tax lien foreclosures shall be in accordance with law. 
(Ord. of 5-15-2000, § 2)
Sec. 86-34. - Exemption of personal property. 
One hundred percent of the value of the tangible personal property as is more fully defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation. 
(Res. of 12-3-2001)
Secs. 86-35—86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—An ordinance of August 6, 2012, amended the Code by repealing former Art. III, §§ 86-61—86-70, and adding a new Art. III. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1965, §§ 3.08.010—3.08.110; and an ordinance of July 5, 2005.
Sec. 86-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Lavonia and, variously, the incorporated territory of Lavonia, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the city or its designee. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., specifically § 48-13-51(b). 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-62. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 86-64. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-63. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 86-64. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)	Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)	An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-64. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-65. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this ordinance becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-66. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)	Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)	Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)	Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)	Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)	Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)	Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)	Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-67. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)	Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-66. 
(c)	Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)	Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)	Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-68. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)	Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 86-67(c). 
(b)	Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-66. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-69. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)	Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)	Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)	Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)	Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)	Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-70. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)	Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)	Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)	Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)	Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Sec. 86-71. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect and submit the tax as required as provided by section 86-63 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 86-66, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2012, § I)
Chapter 90 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public utilities and services, § 1.13(29); franchises, § 6.14.
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 102.
State Law reference— Cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2008, § I)
Editor's note— Sections I and II of an ordinance adopted April 7, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 90-25 and 90-26. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 90-1 and 90-2. 
Sec. 90-2. - Authorized designee to provide notice of franchise fee. 
The city hereby authorizes the city manager, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2008, § II)
See the editor's note to § 90-1. 
Secs. 90-3—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)	Monthly charges for local exchange service, including:
a.	Charges for additional listings and joint users;
b.	The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services;
c.	Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and
d.	Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service.
(2)	Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)	All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)	Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Code 1995, § 5.28.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-32. - Tax levied. 
Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay, on or before August 31 of each year, an occupational license tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the recurring local service revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. The first payment under this article shall cover the period from its effective date through December 31 of the year in which enacted, shall be three percent of the recurring local service revenues billed during that part of the year, and shall be paid on or before March 15 of the following year. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company, which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be credited against the amounts imposed in this section or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 5.28.020)
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-161 et seq.; taxation, ch. 86. 
Sec. 90-33. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)	The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in paragraphs (8) and (9) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1; provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)	Any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § I; Ord. of 8-3-2009(1), § I)
Editor's note— Section I of an ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 90-21 and 90-22. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included within art. II as §§ 90-33 and 90-34. 
Sec. 90-34. - Duties of city manager pertaining to due compensation. 
The city manager shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)	Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)	Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)	Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this section. 
(4)	Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. 
(5)	Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)	Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2008, § I; Ord. of 8-3-2009(1), § II)
See the editor's note to § 90-33. 
Secs. 90-35—90-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GUIDELINES FOR SITING OF TOWERS 

Sec. 90-61. - Purpose and findings. 
The City of Lavonia finds that wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennae (sometimes collectively referred to as "towers"), provide an economic benefit to the city and its residents. The mayor and council that regulation of such towers, among other benefits, ensures public safety and protects property values of the residents of the city. 
By enacting this article, the city intends to: 
(1)	Establish guidelines for the siting of all such towers so as to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
(2)	Foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the city as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. 
(3)	Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city. 
(4)	Protect the city built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-62. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this article the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
Administrator means the city manager of the City of Lavonia, who serves as the administrator of the planning and zoning commission or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the mayor and city council for the City of Lavonia. 
Micro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
Macro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-63. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)	Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(2)	Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service. 
(3)	Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body. 
(4)	Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-64. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(a)	No micro or macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed in the Lavonia Historical District. 
(b)	In areas outside of the Lavonia Historical District, the following provisions apply:
(1)	In Heavy Industrial (B-3) zoning districts micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 80 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 100 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 120 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. 
(2)	In Central Business (B-1), and Local Business (B-2) zoning districts micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. Monopole towers up to a height of 50 feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director and monopole towers up at a height of 80 feet designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. 
(3)	In Two-Family Residential (R-2) zoning districts micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. Monopole towers up to a height of 50 feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. 
(4)	In Single-Family Residential (R-1A and R-1B) zoning districts, micro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the director. 
(5)	Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with sections 102-251 et seq. of the Code of the City of Lavonia as well as receipt of a building permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-65. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)	Preferred location sites. 
(1)	Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this article and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the administrator or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)	Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly-used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly-used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)	Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
(4)	Mixed use buildings in high-density districts. Mixed-use buildings (housing above commercial or other non-residential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(b)	Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential structure or site or multi-family duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-66. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)	General requirements for all telecommunications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this article. 
(1)	Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided, at least annually, to the administrator. 
(2)	Regulatory compliance. 
a.	All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current or revised standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. 
b.	Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
(3)	Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(4)	Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the administrator may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)	Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this article are met. 
(6)	Visual impact. 
a.	Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.	If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.	Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.	Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.	Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)	Landscaping. Subject to prior approval by the planning and zoning commission of the city, landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
(8)	Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)	Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.	Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.	Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)	Lot size and setbacks. 
a.	The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the administrator may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this article would be better served thereby. 
1.	Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
2.	Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3.	Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 90-67. 
b.	For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)	Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)	Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)	Towers shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(3)	When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(4)	In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(5)	Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(6)	Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(7)	Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-67. - Application procedures. 
(a)	General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the administrator by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)	Basic information. 
a.	Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the City of Lavonia Information Technology Services Department. 
b.	Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 90-66(a)(7). 
c.	A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.	A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.	Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
1.	Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.	Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
3.	Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and
4.	Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.	A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.	Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity.
h.	The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.	Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.	Designation of which location preference, identified in section 90-65, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location (1) through (4) or is a disfavored site, describe: (a) what publicly used building, co-location site or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
(2)	Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.	A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. 
b.	If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(3)	Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.	If the proposed site is zoned R-1A, R-1B or R-2 and there are alternative sites in B-1, B-2 or B-3, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. 
b.	Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the administrator. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such collocation is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. 
c.	In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.	The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.	The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)	The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)	Expedited review for building permits only. When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to section 90-64 of this article and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the administrator will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within 14 business days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)	Special use permits. 
(1)	A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the administrator and handled in accordance with the special use permit provision of chapter 102 of the Municipal Code. The zoning appeals board may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 90-66 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)	In granting a special use permit, the zoning appeals board may impose additional zoning requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-68. - Co-location. 
Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-69. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. Upon failure to maintain telecommunications facilities pursuant to this article, the city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-70. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)	Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)	If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-71. - Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses. 
(a)	All telecommunications facilities operative on October 6, 2003 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use and shall be treated as a non-conforming use in accordance with chapter 102 of the Municipal Code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)	A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of October 6, 2003 in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)	Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-72. - Penalty for violation of ordinance. 
(a)	Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this article without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this article shall be deemed in violation of this article and shall be punished as allowed by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lavonia. 
(b)	If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this article or without obtaining that required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Sec. 90-73. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this article would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this article may be granted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-2003, § I)
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Motor vehicles, § 1.13(15).
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for subject matters not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(15); courts, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 62; requirements for vehicles transporting garbage, § 74-33; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78.
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40; driver's licenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq.; restoration of driver's licenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-5-80 et seq.; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; equipment and inspection of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-1 et seq.; Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, O.C.G.A. § 40-9-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; authority of municipal courts to try cases involving state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Adoption of state traffic laws. 
(a)	O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, as they now exist or as they may be hereafter amended, are adopted by reference as if fully set out in this section and shall constitute the traffic code of the city. 
(b)	Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of the traffic code adopted in subsection (a) of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1995, § 10.04.010)
Sec. 94-2. - Maximum speed limits established. 
(a)	In the downtown business district, designated zoning code B-1 by the Official Zoning Map, 20 miles per hour. 
(b)	In any industrial district, designated zoning code B-3 by the Official Zoning Map, 25 miles per hour. 
(c)	In all residential districts, designated zoning code R-1, R-2, or R-3 by the Official Zoning Map, 25 miles per hour. 
(d)	In all specially designated districts, such as hospital zones, school zones, and other areas of acute traffic danger, 15 miles per hour. These specially designated districts shall be plainly and distinctly marked with appropriate signage placed by the police department. 
(Code 1995, § 10.08.010; Ord. of 6-3-2013(2), § I)
Sec. 94-3. - Unmuffled use of engine brakes prohibited. 
No person shall be permitted to operate or allow to be operated an internal combustion engine powered vehicle on any right-of-way in the corporate limits of Lavonia including but not limited to streets, alleys, easements, or rights-of-way established for vehicle operation within the corporate limits of the city while said vehicle or operator is utilizing an engine brake without an exhaust muffler sufficient to prevent the creation of excessively loud noises by said vehicle; provided the engine brake can be utilized in an emergency if necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2009, § I)
Sec. 94-4. - Trucks with more than three axles in the central business district prohibited. 
Trucks with more than three axles are prohibited on certain city streets within the Central Business District, zoning code B-1, except for local delivery of goods and services destined for businesses and restaurants located within the district. The following city streets shall be designated as "Trucks with more than three axles prohibited" and shall be plainly and distinctly marked with appropriate signage placed by the police department: 
(1)	West Main Street from Thomas Street to Burton Street.
(2)	Jones Street Ext. from Augusta Road (Hwy 17) to Burton Street.
(3)	West Bowman Street from Jones Street (Hwy 17) to West Main Street.
(4)	Grogan Street from Vickery Street to Augusta Road (Hwy 17).
(Ord. of 6-3-2013, § II)
Sec. 94-5. - Speed detection devices permitted. 
Speed detection devices shall be permitted for the purpose of monitoring vehicular speed by the police department to insure safe traffic movement on the following list of streets and roadways as identified and listed in a speed detection device permit issued by the Georgia Department of Transportation: 
SPEED DETECTION DEVICES 
LIST OF ROADWAYS FOR CITY OF LAVONIA ON-SYSTEM 

 
**SCHOOL ZONE HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE** 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
(Ord. of 6-3-2013(2), § I; Ord. of 3-3-2014, § I)
Secs. 94-6—94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 94-31. - Purpose; definition. 
(a)	Purpose. The mayor and council of the city find that certain public streets located within the corporate limits of the city are designed and constructed so as to safely permit the use thereof by regular vehicular traffic and also the driving thereon of motorized carts. The mayor and council further find that recreation paths are designed and constructed so as so safely permit travel thereon by motorized carts. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized streets means all such streets which have been authorized for motorized cart travel and are on file with the city clerk. The list of authorized streets (section 94-36) is subject to amendment from time to time by the mayor and council. 
Motorized cart means all electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts which are commonly called golf carts and UTVs (utility vehicles). Within this article, the terms "motorized cart," "golf cart" and "cart" shall have the same meanings; these are the only carts authorized for use under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-32. - Operation of gasoline-powered carts. 
(a)	Every cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)	The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to, and including, the muffler(s) and exhaust pipe(s). 
(2)	The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened.
(3)	The engine of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and turned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cart to operate, or permit the operation of, such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, has been altered, rendered unserviceable or removed. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-33. - Operating regulations. 
(a)	Only persons age 55 or older and persons who are disabled as certified by Social Security or by a physician authorized to practice medicine in the state are eligible and are allowed to operate a motorized cart on the recreation paths and designated streets in the city. 
(b)	Prior to operating a motorized car as authorized in this article the operator must register with the city and must obtain an operating permit which is to be affixed to the motorized cart. The city manager is authorized to establish regulations consistent with the intent of this article to govern the safe operation of motorized carts on the authorized streets within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)	All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths or authorized streets, to included specific regulations established by the city. Recreation paths must be used in preference to parallel authorized streets. 
(d)	Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. Motorized carts may be operated over authorized streets or paths only during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(e)	A permit issued by the city will authorize operation during daylight hours only unless specifically approved for operational use at times after daylight. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for the owner to operate or permit the operation of such cart over the recreation paths or authorized streets in violation of this article or in violation of the regulations established by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-34. - Recreation path users prohibited uses. 
Recreation paths shall not be used by: 
(1)	Automobiles and trucks, except authorized maintenance vehicles;
(2)	Motorcycles;
(3)	Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles, including, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, commonly known as ATVs; 
(4)	Mini bikes and mopeds;
(5)	Horses; and
(6)	Go-carts.
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-35. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the recreation paths or authorized streets. Such hazardous activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Racing of any kind, except for special events approved by the city.
(2)	Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city.
(3)	Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on recreation path bridges or in underpasses. 
(4)	Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the recreation paths to ensure safe passage. 
(5)	An audible warning shall be given by operators of motorized carts and other users of the recreation paths, such as bicyclists and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. 
(6)	All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and the use thereof, including open container laws, apply to the recreation paths. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-36. - Authorized and prohibited streets. 
All residential and commercial city owned streets within the city limits are approved for motorized cart operation. Prohibited streets include all Georgia State Routes, specifically Highway 17 (Augusta Road and Jones Street), Highway 59 (West Avenue and Vickery Street), and Highway 77 connector (Hartwell Road). Motorized carts are allowed to cross these state routes in order to gain access to another residential or commercial street on the other side of the state highway. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-37. - Liability. 
Each person using the recreation paths or city streets is liable for his or her own actions. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Sec. 94-38. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(1), § I)
Chapter 95 - RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 95-151. - Requirements of utility who discontinues operation. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 95-1. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Lavonia (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, paragraph 1 (city), 2 (county), and 3 (both) of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-20 (36-34-2) and O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-42(6) (32-4-92), has adopted this chapter for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. I, § 1)
Sec. 95-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. I, § 2)
Sec. 95-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Lavonia, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
Codified Ordinances means the Codified Ordinances of the City of Lavonia, Georgia. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install wires, install conduit, install pipes, install transmission lines, install poles, install signs, or install facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing signs, or installing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety, or of a significant loss of real or personal property. 
Excavation means any work in the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to opening the public right-of-way; installing, servicing, repairing or modifying any facility in or under the surface or subsurface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to a utility's poles, wires, optical fibers, cables, electrical conductors, conduits, ducts, innerducts, pipes, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances, appurtenances and future technology authorized in a permit or written service agreement. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Mayor and council means the legislative governing body of the city. 
Registration means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written service agreement with the city or in a related provision of this code of ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. Rights-of-way shall not include buildings, parks, bridges, river, tunnel, viaduct, conduit or other public property or easements that have not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law. Rights-of-way shall not include private easements or public property, except to the extent the use or occupation of public property is specifically granted in a written approval of registration. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests. 
Underground facilities means all lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts, tanks, vaults, wires and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially underneath rights-of-way. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means any privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, servicer, contractor, sub-contractor or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
Working day means any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday excluding legal holidays observed by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. I, § 3)
Sec. 95-4. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)	No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(b)	No utility shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this chapter. 
(c)	Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)	No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. IX, §§ 1—4)
Sec. 95-5. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or which may be hereafter vested in the City under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written approval of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. X, § 2)
Sec. 95-6. - Compliance. 
No utility shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. X, § 3)
Sec. 95-7. - Appeals. 
All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager of public service as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. X, § 4)
Secs. 95-8—95-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 95-31. - Administration. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this chapter except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. II, § 1)
Sec. 95-32. - Rights-of-way occupancy registration. 
(a)	Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance. 
(b)	Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in any rights-of-way under the control of city, unless specifically exempted by state, federal law or this code, shall file a notification of construction with the department. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. II, § 2)
Sec. 95-33. - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the permit registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility to be installed, maintained or repaired in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(3)	A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)	A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. II, § 3)
Sec. 95-34. - Issuance of written acceptance of registration. 
(a)	If a registration is incomplete, the city manager shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city manager shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(b)	Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining the permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. II, § 4)
Sec. 95-35. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. II, § 5)
Secs. 95-36—95-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOTIFICATION TO CITY OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 95-61. - Notification required. 
Written notification to the city manager from the utility is required prior to any of the following activities: 
(1)	Before any utility does any work to construct, install, maintain, remove or relocate facilities on, along, over or under the right-of-way in the city; or 
(2)	Construction adjacent to the rights-of-way in the city that require tree trimming within the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. III, § 1)
Sec. 95-62. - Notification procedure. 
The written notification shall be submitted on a form provided by the city manager and shall specifically include: 
(1)	The name and address of the utility;
(2)	The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)	The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work;
(4)	The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)	The projected dates for the work to be started and finished;
(6)	The estimated cost of the project;
(7)	An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or to any member of the public caused by work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. III, § 2)
Sec. 95-63. - Locate requests required. 
As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended. No utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the Utility Protection Center, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. III, § 3)
Secs. 95-64—95-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 95-91. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions set forth is this article may result in revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. V)
Sec. 95-92. - Utility accommodation policy and standards manual adopted. 
The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (Permit Forms and supporting Documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the city manager or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of Lavonia municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. V)
Sec. 95-93. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
In conformance with city policy, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way, or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. V)
Sec. 95-94. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. V)
Sec. 95-95. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. V)
Secs. 95-96—95-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 95-121. - Generally. 
A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder or thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the that caused such disturbance or damage. If utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. VI)
Secs. 95-122—95-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISCONTINUANCE OF OPERATIONS, ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES 

Sec. 95-151. - Requirements of utility who discontinues operation. 
A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)	Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter and any other provision in the Codified Ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; or 
(2)	Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; or
(3)	Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the city manager; or 
(4)	Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or 
(5)	Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
a.	Purchase the facilities;
b.	Accept donation of some or all facilities; or
c.	Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. VII, § 1)
Sec. 95-152. - Failure to comply. 
Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. VII, § 2)
Secs. 95-153—95-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TERMINATION OF REGISTRATION 

Sec. 95-181. - Renewal of registration statement; determination for written notice of default. 
The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The city manager shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)	Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)	Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter;
(3)	Practiced any fraud or deceit upon city; or
(4)	Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration.
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. VIII, § 1)
Sec. 95-182. - Failure to cure default; termination of registration approval. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the city manager decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)	City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)	If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. 
(Ord. of 5-4-2009, art. VIII, § 2)
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal utilities, § 1.13(20); public utilities and services, § 1.13(29); sewer fees, § 1.13(33); service charges, § 6.15; special assessments, § 6.16.
Cross reference— Any ordinance establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for utility services or connections or for any other purpose saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(16); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; businesses, ch. 26; environment, ch. 46; historic preservation, ch. 54; planning, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 82; easements in subdivisions, § 82-127; telecommunications, ch. 90.
State Constitution reference—Municipal water and sewerage services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III.
State Law reference— Dumping wastes into sewer pipeline, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; damaging or interfering with utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; blasting or excavating near underground gas pipes and utility facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.; franchises, contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipal water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; disposal of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7 et seq.; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2; public utilities, O.C.G.A. title 46.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Utilities not to be connected without notice from building inspector. 
No utility shall make any new or remodeled service connections to any building or manufactured home in the city without being first notified in writing by the building inspector that all codes and ordinances of the city have been complied with by the premises to be served. 
(Code 1995, § 13.04.010)
Sec. 98-2. - Connections to city utilities to be made under city supervision; permit. 
All connections to the city sewerage and water systems shall be made at the place on the property designated by the water and sewer superintendent. It is unlawful for any person to make any connection to, tap-in, repair, add to or otherwise tamper with or change any of the city utilities systems without a permit therefor from the city. All work performed under such permit shall be subject to inspection and approval by the building inspector. 
(Code 1995, § 13.04.020)
Sec. 98-3. - Application for water and sewer service. 
The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, at the city hall. 
(Code 1995, § 13.04.020)
Sec. 98-4. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)	Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)	Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.070)
Sec. 98-5. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.080)
Sec. 98-6. - Tampering with meters. 
It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, damage or injure any gas meter, electric meter, water meter or sewer meter in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 13.04.030)
Secs. 98-7—98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-31. - Meter required; installation. 
No person shall consume water from the city water system unless the water shall first pass through a water meter which shall measure the volume of water to be consumed. The city shall install meters required by this section at the expense of the consumer. 
(Code 1995, § 13.08.030)
Sec. 98-32. - City's responsibility and liability. 
The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the minimum connection fee, will be made for a 5/8-inch by ¾-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the minimum connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(1)	The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)	The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)	The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.050(A)—(C))
Sec. 98-33. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)	Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)	The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)	The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of human resources. 
(4)	In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system and all applicants, by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.060)
Sec. 98-34. - Connection to water system—Engineering analysis. 
For any new connection to the city water system that will increase the velocity of flow in an existing city pipeline receiving the requested connection by more than two feet per second or increase the flow in the city's pipeline receiving the proposed connection by more flow than listed in Table 1, it will be required that the entity requesting the new service connection provide an engineering analysis of the impact of the connection upon the existing system. A professional engineer registered in the state must submit the analysis to the city. 
Table 1 

 
The entity requesting the new service connection may agree to reimburse the city for an analysis performed by the city's consulting engineer. The analysis must show the proposed new connection will not cause the city water system to be operated in violation of any state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD) rule or guideline in relation to residual pressures. In addition, as per the EPD Rules for Safe Drinking Water, Chapter 191-3-5.10, Distribution System, amended, demand flow of the proposed new connection under all conditions of flow must at no time cause the residual pressures to be reduced below 20 pounds per square inch at the new connection or any other existing connection within the city water system. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2006(2), § I)
Sec. 98-35. - Same—Fire pump suppression systems. 
The city does not guarantee an ample water supply from the city water distribution system for fire suppression needs. Certain conditions beyond the city's control might prevail at various times of the day that would limit the available water supply within the city water distribution system. The city water supply may be used in limited quantities when available for fire suppression purposes according to the following stipulations: 
(1)	The city shall require an engineering analysis report of the impact upon the existing city water system of any proposed new or replacement commercial/industrial fire pump suppression system having a demand flow rate up to 1,000 gallons per minute. This analysis report and the installation specifications of the fire suppression system must be approved by the city's consulting engineer before a permit will be issued for connection to the city water system. 
(2)	A proposed fire suppression system with a demand flow rate and pump capacity exceeding 1,000 gallons per minute utilizing the city water system as a water source will not be allowed to connect without providing an auxiliary water supply source as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)	If a fire suppression system demand flow rate and pump capacity exceeds the 1,000 gallons per minute threshold, onsite water storage must be provided by the commercial/industrial entity in sufficient quantity to cover the initial drawdown requirements as specified by the fire suppression system manufacturer or the entity's insurance underwriters. All plans for onsite water storage must be approved by the water superintendent and the city's consulting engineer before a connection permit will be issued. 
(4)	All commercial/industrial entities requesting fire line water service shall provide and install at their expense a backflow device as specified by the city water superintendent on all sanitary and fire lines in an approved vault located onsite and maintain these devices at the entity's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state department of natural resources, EPD division. 
(5)	Sanitary, potable, or production water service lines located inside the commercial/industrial facility shall not be connected under any circumstances to an existing or newly installed fire system water service line. 
(6)	The city reserves the right for its duly authorized agents to enter the premises of the commercial/industrial entity at all hours for the purpose of inspecting sanitary water and fire line connections, back flow and/or cut-off valves in connection with the fire system service lines and its facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2014(2), § I)
Secs. 98-36—98-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 46.
Sec. 98-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1995, § 13.12.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-52. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)	This division shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector of the city. 
(b)	Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1995, § 13.12.060)
Sec. 98-53. - Restrictions generally. 
Residential construction and commercial construction shall be in compliance with water conservation restrictions as required by state law and regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 13.12.020—13.12.050)
Sec. 98-54. - Emergencies. 
Water use restrictions during water shortages or other emergencies shall be as provided in state law and regulations. 
(Code 1995, §§ 13.16.010, 13.16.020)
Sec. 98-55. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)	Restrictions. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)	Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)	Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)	Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)	Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)	Watering personal food gardens;
(6)	Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)	Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses;
(8)	Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container;
(9)	Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)	Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation;
(11)	Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas;
(12)	Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or
(13)	Hydroseeding.
(b)	Enforcement. 
(1)	No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)	The city police department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)	Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2010)
Secs. 98-56—98-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the department of public health of the county. 
Domestic sewage means the liquid wastes from kitchens and laundries in dwelling units. 
Industrial liquid waste means liquid or waterborne wastes from an industrial process. 
Private sewerage system means a sewerage system other than a public sewerage system. 
Public sewerage system means a sewerage system owned by a political subdivision of the state. 
Sanitary sewage means human excrement or the wastes from water closets, lavatories, urinals, bathtubs and showers. 
Sewage means sanitary sewage, domestic sewage, and industrial liquid wastes, separately or in any combination. 
Sewerage system means a privy pit, privy vault, septic tank, nitrification field, tile absorption field, dosing tank, filter bed, sewer, grease trap, settling tank, grit chamber, digestion tank, pump, appurtenance, equipment, or any combination of these used or intended for use in conveying, treating or disposing of sewage. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.010)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-82. - Sanitary sewage disposal system required; when connection to public sewerage system required. 
(a)	Any owner of a building designed or used for human habitation or congregation shall provide on the premises a method of sanitary sewage disposal for the use of the persons who regularly use the building and for the use of transient members of the public. The owner shall provide one or more sanitary water closets connected to a public sewerage system, if the public sewerage system is accessible and within a reasonable distance of the property upon which the building is located. The owner shall provide a private sewerage system if a public sewerage system is not available. 
(b)	It is unlawful for any person to have or maintain on his premises an open or surface toilet; all human waste must be disposed of by sewer, septic tank or cesspool. 
(Code 1995, §§ 9.08.050, 13.20.020)
Sec. 98-83. - Permit required for construction or modification of sewerage facilities. 
A construction permit from the department shall be required before construction is begun on any building. No person shall connect to the public sewerage system or construct or modify a private sewerage system until the proposed system has been submitted to and approved by the department, by the issuance of a construction permit. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.030)
Sec. 98-84. - Sewer taps. 
The city will make the sewer tap stop on the homeowners property, and the homeowner shall finish the line with a cleanout plug installed here. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.120)
Sec. 98-85. - Inspection, approval required of private systems; notice to the department. 
No person who constructs or modifies a private sewerage system shall cover any part of the system until he has notified the department of the completion of his work and the department has inspected and approved the system as constructed or modified. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.040)
Sec. 98-86. - Sewage not to flow into stormwater system. 
No person shall connect a sewerage system so that sewage flows into a stormwater sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for stormwater. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.050)
Sec. 98-87. - Discharge of domestic sewage on surface of ground. 
No person shall discharge domestic sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge sewage in a way that permits it to come to the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.060)
Sec. 98-88. - Water closets required for new dwelling. 
No building for human occupancy shall be constructed without inside plumbing, consisting of one or more sanitary water closets. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.070)
Sec. 98-89. - Septic tank and absorption field standards generally. 
All septic tanks and tile absorption fields shall conform to the recommendations of the state department of human resources. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.080)
Sec. 98-90. - Department to approve sewerage systems in subdivisions. 
No person shall begin the physical development of a subdivision of five or more lots in which one or more private sewerage systems are to be constructed until he has submitted to the department a plat of the proposed subdivision showing the lot boundaries, the topography, the location and results of soil percolation tests on each acre of the proposed subdivision, and until the department has approved the location as suitable for the type and size of private sewerage system proposed. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.090)
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 82. 
Sec. 98-91. - Private removal of sewage. 
All sewage that is not beneficially used, reused or recycled pursuant to state laws and rules shall be removed, transported, disposed of or otherwise handled in accordance with an approval or permit issued by the state under the authority of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the Georgia Air Quality Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.). No person shall use equipment that will permit spillage or exposure of the sewage to the outside air. Sewage sludge shall be disposed of by: 
(1)	Disposal at a sewage treatment plant.
(2)	Burial on private premises, with the owner's written permission, at least 500 feet from any human habitation and so as not to endanger any water supply. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.100)
Sec. 98-92. - Systems constituting menace to public health. 
Whenever the department has determined that a private sewerage system is constructed, operated or maintained so as to constitute a menace to public health, the owner of the premises shall be served with a written notice of the existence of the conditions complained of. Upon failure of the owner to eliminate such conditions, the owner shall be notified to be and appear at such time and place as may be determined by the city council, to show cause why the nuisance complained of should not be abated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.110)
Sec. 98-93. - Sewerage systems under construction to be prepared for connections. 
Each person in constructing, building or laying pipe or tile as a part of a sewerage system, or to become a part thereof, shall stub out, or extend from the sewerage system, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner in the area in which such sewerage system is being constructed, built or laid, or in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection. The connection shall extend to the property line of the property owner. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.120)
Sec. 98-94. - Installation of sewerage system facilities prior to paving streets; assessment of costs. 
(a)	Each person shall, before paving, repairing or otherwise improving any street, or any area to become a street in the city, shall stub out, or extend from the sewerage system as it exists in the right-of-way or the area to become a street, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner adjoining the right-of-way on both sides thereof or, in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection. 
(b)	If the city council shall deem it necessary to make improvements to streets as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1, and shall proceed as provided by law, the improvement shall include the stubbing out, or extending from the sewerage system as it exists in the street right-of-way, so as to connect to the sewerage system each property owner adjoining the street right-of-way on both sides, or, in the case of a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision, to each lot to be served by a sewer connection, and the cost of the connections shall be assessed as an improvement in addition to the assessment of the cost of other improvements. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.130)
Sec. 98-95. - Connections; when required; notice from city clerk. 
All property owners within the city abutting on, contiguous to, or near to any sewer line in the city as provided in section 82-162(4) shall, within 30 days after receipt of a written notice from the city clerk, connect their premises with the sewerage system. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.150)
Sec. 98-96. - Permit from building inspector required. 
No connections or tap shall be made to the sewerage system of the city unless a permit has first been obtained therefor from the building inspector. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.160)
Sec. 98-97. - City to make connections. 
All public sewer connections or taps shall be made exclusively by personnel of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.170)
Sec. 98-98. - Grease traps. 
(a)	It shall be a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lavonia for any person or persons to dump, deposit, place, or to permit the dumping, depositing, or placing of grease, grease by-products, and similar substances into the sewer system of the city. 
(b)	All grease traps must be constructed and maintained pursuant to regulations adopted by the City of Lavonia, as well as, all regulations promulgated by any state or federal regulatory agency, to include EPD/EPA. 
(c)	Each grease trap, grease sump, or grease barrier shall be inspected on a monthly basis by the city inspections department for the purpose of determining that each grease trap, grease sump, or grease barrier is properly maintained and operated so as to prevent grease, grease by-products and similar substances from entering or being deposited into the sanitary sewer system of the city. It is a violation of this section to fail to maintain and operate any such grease trap, grease sump, or grease barrier in such a manner so as to not prohibit grease, grease products or similar substances from entering or being deposited into the sanitary sewer system of the city. 
(d)	Residential regulations.
(1)	It is the specific intent of this section to apply to owners of two-family, multi-family residential developments, and manufactured home parks whose developed residential areas utilize a contract sewer collection facility which is connected to the sewer lines of the city. 
(2)	Owners of two-family or multi-family residential developments, including all manufactured home parks, currently in existence and currently using the city sewer system shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for a period of two years from the approval of this section or until such time that a grease issue arises that mandates that a grease trap be installed. Thereafter such owners shall comply fully with the requirements of this section. 
(3)	It shall be a violation of this section for the owner of any multi-family or multi-unit residential development as defined by the city zoning ordinance or any manufactured home park connected to the city sanitary sewer system whose multi-family or multi-unit tenants are capable of creating or normally create grease as a waste product to use the sanitary sewer system of the city without first installing a grease trap, grease pump, or other devise or mechanism of appropriate capacity and capability approved by the city to trap and hold grease and thus prevent its passage into the sanitary sewer system of the city. Such owner is required to properly and regularly clean out, maintain, and operate such grease trap or other facility so as to insure its effectiveness as a grease barrier. The city inspections department and its agent or agents is specifically authorized to enter upon the premises of such at all reasonable times to inspect such grease trap or other device to insure its proper operation. 
(e)	Commercial regulations.
(1)	It shall further be a violation of this section for any commercial consumer connected to the city sanitary sewer system whose business is capable of creating or normally creates grease as a waste product to use the sanitary sewer system without first installing in such business a grease trap, grease pump, or other device or mechanism of appropriate capacity and capability approved by the city to trap and hold grease and thus prevent its passage into the sanitary sewer system of the city. Such commercial consumers are required to properly and regularly clean out, maintain, and operate such grease trap or other facility so as to insure its effectiveness as a grease barrier. Any such business or commercial activity specifically authorizes the city inspections department and its agent or agents to enter upon the premises of such business at all reasonable times to inspect such grease trap or other device to insure its proper operation. 
(2)	A properly executed "commercial waste manifest," such as the Georgia Environmental Protection Division Manifest Form, must be sent to the city inspections department within ten days of clean out servicing by the commercial waste servicing company as proof that the commercial consumer's grease trap has been properly serviced as required by this section. All commercial waste servicing companies must be certified by the state department of human resources, division of public health and environmental health branch, and hold a current city occupational tax certificate. 
(3)	All newly constructed food service businesses, including but not limited to, restaurants, delicatessens, sandwich shops, grocery store meat departments, school cafeterias, and/or any business that processes or handles food products that require repackaging of meats, meat processing or meat wash off, must install a grease catching device or trap as per approved construction specifications labeled as Exhibit A, attached to an ordinance adopted August 2, 2010. A grease trap filter is additionally required and must be installed as part of any commercial grease trap connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city. The specifications for the filter installation is labeled as Exhibit B, attached to an ordinance adopted August 2, 2010. A final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until each commercial consumer's grease trap has been duly inspected and approved by the city inspections department. 
(4)	A grease filter system is required on all pre-existing grease traps connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city regardless of the age of the installation. All existing commercial grease trap consumers shall be notified by the city inspections department of this requirement and given 45 days from said notification to bring their grease trap system into compliance. 
(f)	Any commercial grease trap system or residential grease trap subject to this section that is determined to be non-functional by the city inspections department must be replaced as per the specifications outlined in Exhibit A within 30 days of written notification to the consumer by the city inspections department. Failure to comply with said notification shall result in immediate termination of all water and sewer services at that location until such time as the necessary corrections are completed by the consumer and duly inspected and approved by the city inspections department. 
(g)	Any violation of this section is subject to the enforcement provision of article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 13.04.040; Ord. of 5-7-2007, § I; Ord. of 1-5-2009, § I; Ord. of 8-2-2010(1), § I) 
Secs. 98-99—98-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF SEWER AND DRAIN SYSTEMS 

Sec. 98-111. - Definitions. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act and the Act mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the director of the environmental protection division, state department of natural resources. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)	A principal executive officer of, at minimum, the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)	A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)	An authorized representative who is responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (MGLE)). 
Building sewer means a private sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to a community sewer. 
Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards. 
City means the city council or the City of Lavonia, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
City engineer means the individual or firm employed in such capacity by the city council; or the public works director, his duly authorized agent, deputy or representative. 
Committee means a committee of the city council charged with the overview of the sewer system. 
Community sewer means any public sewer containing wastewater from more than one premise. 
Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, and fecal coliform bacteria. 
Control authority means the "approval authority," defined in this section; or the director of public works. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant is heat. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means an agency of the United States, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Grab sample means a water sample which is taken on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste system and without consideration of time. 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system) for treatment before direct discharge to the waters of the state. 
Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
Interference means inhibition or disruption of the sewer system, treatment processes or operations or which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
Mass emission rate means the weight of material discharged to the community sewer system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system permit and NPDES permit mean a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
National prohibitive discharge standard and prohibitive discharge standard mean any regulation developed under the authority of section 307 (b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing section 307 (c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
Normal sewage means those liquid wastes that are within the limits established by section 98-114. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns. 
PH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means the manmade or man induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
Premises means a parcel of real estate or portion thereof including any improvements thereon which is determined by the superintendent to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for services. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works and POTW mean a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to such a treatment works, but does not include pipes, sewers, or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
Reclaimed water means water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for direct beneficial uses or a controlled use that would not occur otherwise. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)	Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday;
(2)	Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment plant; 
(3)	Has in its waste, toxic pollutants as defined in section 307 of the Act; or
(4)	Is found by the city, the state environmental protection division (EPD) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, or the system's effluent quality, that is generated by the system. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Supervisor means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the wastewater treatment plant and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division, or his authorized representative. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of 33 USC 1317. 
Treatment works means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems separate or combined, pumping stations and other equipment and appurtenances; extensions, improvements, additions and alterations thereof; and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
24-four hour composite sample means a sample consisting of several effluent portions collected during a 24-hour period and combined to form a representative sample. 
Unpolluted water means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the state or the Environmental Protection Agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal to storm or natural drainage, or directly to surface waters. 
User means any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into a community sewer. 
Waste includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
Wastewater means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume, and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, and strength of wastewater. 
Wastewater contribution permit means as set forth in section 98-118. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, and aquifers. 
(b)	The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
GMP means good management practices. 
L means liter. 
MG means milligrams. 
MGLE means milligrams per liter. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 1)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-112. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)	Except as provided in this division, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 2)
Sec. 98-113. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 98-112(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(b)	Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the county board of health. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the board of health, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(c)	A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the board of health. It shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event the applicant for the permit shall notify the board of health when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered, excluding the building sewer to the private sewer disposal system. 
(d)	The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)	At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 98-113(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)	The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)	No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the board of health. 
(h)	When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to such sewer within 90 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 3)
Sec. 98-114. - Discharge into publicly owned treatment works. 
(a)	Prohibited pollutants. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)	Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and sulfides and any other substances which have been determined to be a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)	Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW such as, but not limited to: Grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)	Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 at any time, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)	Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the WWTP, or to exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)	Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)	Any substance which may cause the WWTP's effluent or any other product of the WWTP such as residues, sludge, or scum, to be suitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the WWTP to be in noncompliance with the sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)	Any substance which will cause the WWTP to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)	Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)	Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the WWTP, but in no case wastewater which will cause the temperature at the influent of the WWTP to exceed 40 degrees C (104 degrees F). No user shall discharge into any sewer line or other appurtenances of the POTW wastewater with a temperature exceeding 65.5 degrees C (150 degrees F). 
(10)	Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the WWTP. In no case, shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants at its introduction into the POTW that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)	Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city engineer in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)	Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
(13)	Any surface runoff waters.
(b)	Duty of city engineer. The city engineer, as applicable, shall establish limitations or prohibitions in the wastewater discharge permit of any user as necessary to achieve the purpose and policy of this division. 
(c)	Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The city engineer shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(d)	Use of garbage grinders. Waste from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a community sewer except where generated in preparation of food consumed on the premises, and then only where applicable fees therefor are paid. Such grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the community sewers. Garage grinders shall not be used for the grinding of plastics, paper products, insert materials, or garden refuse. This provision shall not apply to domestic residences. 
(e)	Point of discharge. No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless he shall have been issued a permit by the city engineer. 
(f)	Septic tank pumping, hauling and discharge. No person owning vacuum or "cesspool" pump trucks or other liquid waste transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such sewage into the WWTP. 
(g)	Other holding tank waste. No person shall discharge any other holding tank waste into the WWTP; provided, however, no permit will be required to discharge domestic waste from a recreational vehicle's tank. 
(h)	Wastewater strength. No person or user shall discharge wastewater in excess of the concentration set forth in the table below unless: the wastewater discharge permit of the user provides as a special permit condition a higher interim concentration level and a requirement that the user construct a pretreatment facility or institute changes in operations and maintenance procedures to reduce the concentration of pollutants to levels not exceeding the standards set forth in the discharge permit within a fixed period of time. 

 
(i)	Pretreatment requirements. A user of the treatment plant shall design, construct, operate, and maintain wastewater pretreatment facilities whenever necessary to reduce or modify the user's wastewater constituency to achieve compliance with the limitations in wastewater strength set forth in subsection (a) of this section, to meet applicable national pretreatment standards, or to meet any other wastewater condition or limitation contained in the user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(j)	Plans and specifications. Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for such wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be prepared by a registered engineer, and shall be submitted to the city engineer for review in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The city engineer shall review such plans within 45 days and shall recommend to the user any appropriate changes. Prior to beginning construction of such pretreatment facility, the user shall submit a set of construction plans and specifications to be maintained by the supervisor. Prior to beginning construction the user shall also secure such building, plumbing, or other permits that may be required by the city or county. The user shall construct said pretreatment facility within the time provided in the user's wastewater discharge permit. Following completion of construction the user shall provide the supervisor with two sets of "as-built" drawings to be maintained by the supervisor. 
(k)	State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(l)	City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary. 
(m)	Excessive discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the city, the county or the state. 
(n)	Prevention of accidental discharges. All industrial users shall provide such facilities and institute such procedures as are reasonably necessary to prevent or minimize the potential for accidental discharge into the WWTP of waste regulated by this division from liquid or raw material storage areas, from truck and rail car loading and unloading areas, from in-plant transfer or processing and material handling areas, and from diked area or holding ponds of any waste regulated by this division. The wastewater discharge permit of any user who has a potential of significant leaks, spills, or other accidental discharge of waste regulated by this division shall be subject to a special permit condition or requirement for the construction of facilities or establishment of procedures which will prevent or minimize the potential for such accidental discharge. Plans, specifications, and operating procedures for such special permit conditions shall be developed by the user and submitted to the city engineer for review under the provisions of subsection (k) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 4; Ord. of 12-18-2008, § I; Ord. of 1-3-2012(1), § I)
Sec. 98-115. - Fees. 
(a)	Charges and fees authorized. The city may adopt charges and fees for the following: 
(1)	Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)	Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(3)	Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4)	Fees for filing appeals;
(5)	Fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this division; 
(6)	Fees for holding tank waste.
(b)	Separate from other fees. The fees authorized in this section relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 5)
Sec. 98-116. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)	The owner or his agent shall make application on a plumbing permit form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, etc., as may be required by the city. 
(c)	All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The owner shall pay all required permit fees and connection fees. 
(d)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)	The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.E.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)	No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)	The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.E.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All applicable requirements of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (29 USC 651 et seq.) will be complied with and all such connections shall be gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(j)	The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city inspection department when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The connection to the public sewer shall be made under the supervision of the city engineer or his representative following a 24-hour advance notification to the city. 
(k)	All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 6)
Sec. 98-117. - Inspection, monitoring and entry. 
(a)	Whenever required to develop or assist in the development of any effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition, or effluent standard, pretreatment standard, standard of performance, or permit condition under this division; determine whether any person is in violation of any effluent limitation, or other limitation, prohibition or effluent standard, pretreatment standard, standard or performance; or make any necessary investigation relevant to this division: 
(1)	The supervisor may require any nondomestic user to:
a.	Establish and maintain records;
b.	Make reports;
c.	Install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or methods (including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods); 
d.	Sample effluents (in accordance with methods, at locations, at intervals, and in a manner as the supervisor shall prescribe); and 
e.	Provide other information as he may reasonably require; and
(2)	The supervisor:
a.	Shall have a right of entry to, upon, or through any premises in which an effluent source is located or in which any records required to be maintained under subsection (a)(1) of this section are located; and 
b.	May, at reasonable times, have access to and copy any records, inspect any monitoring equipment or method required under subsection (a)(1) of this section, and sample any effluents which discharged to the POTW. 
(b)	Any records, reports, or information obtained under this section shall be related to any applicable effluent limitations, toxic, pretreatment, and shall be available to the public. Upon presentation of satisfactory information to the supervisor by the permittee, that records, reports or information, or particular part thereof (other than effluent data), to which the supervisor has access under this section, is entitled to protection as trade secrets. The supervisor shall consider such record, report or information, or particular portion thereof, confidential in accordance with this division, except that such record, report, or information may be disclosed to representatives of the state environmental protection division and Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)	Specific requirements under the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be established by the supervisor, the city or the county, as applicable, for each industrial user. The nature or degree of any requirement under this provision shall depend upon the nature of the user's discharge, the impact of the user's discharge, the impact of the discharge on the WWTP, the volume of water discharged, and the technical feasibility of and economic reasonableness of any such requirement imposed. The user shall be required to design any necessary facility, and to submit detailed design plans and operating procedures to the city engineer for review in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The city engineer shall review such plans within 45 days and shall recommend to the user any change he deems appropriate. 
(d)	Upon approval of plans as specified in subsection (c) of this section, the user shall secure such building, electrical, plumbing or other permits as may be required by this Code and proceed to construct any necessary facility and establish such operating procedures as are required. 
(e)	If any user denies the supervisor or his authorized representative the right of entry, to or upon the user's premises, for purposes of inspection, sampling effluents, or inspecting and copying records, or performing such other duties as shall be imposed upon him by this section, the city shall seek a warrant or use such other legal procedures as shall be advisable and reasonably necessary to discharge the supervisor's duties under this section. 
(f)	Any user failing or refusing to discharge any duty imposed upon him under the provisions of this section, or who denies the supervisor the right to enter upon the user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling effluents, inspecting and copying records, or such other duties as may be imposed upon him by this section, shall be deemed to have violated conditions of this division. 
(g)	All non-domestic users must sample and test their discharge at least once each year (June). All users with pretreatment facilities must sample and test their discharge monthly for the general parameters (section 98-114(h)) as well as any other requested by the city wastewater plant superintendent (hereinafter as "superintendent"). Upon satisfactory performance for three consecutive months, testing frequency may be extended to once per quarter by the supervisor (March, June, September, and December). Upon receiving non-compliant results for any parameter, monthly testing will be required again until satisfactory performance is obtained for three consecutive months, at which time the testing frequency may be extended to once per quarter again by the superintendent. Testing results shall be reported to the superintendent by the 15th of the month following the month the testing was performed in. All users with pretreatment facilities must report their test results on the report form provided by the superintendent. Flow data may be required as well. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 7; Ord. of 7-7-2008, § I)
Sec. 98-118. - Notice of dangerous discharge. 
(a)	Telephone notification. Any person causing or suffering any discharge, whether accidental or not, which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, to the environment, or which is likely to cause interference with the WWTP, shall notify the supervisor immediately by telephone. In the absence of the supervisor, notification shall be given to the city employee then in charge of the treatment works. 
(b)	Written report. Within five days following such occurrence, the user shall provide the supervisor with a detailed report describing the cause of the dangerous discharge and measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWTP, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(c)	Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure all employees who may cause or suffer a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 8)
Sec. 98-119. - Enforcement and abatement. 
(a)	Harmful contributions. The city may suspend the water and sewer service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of his water and sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the water and sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the WWTP system or danger to any persons. The city shall reinstate the water and sewer service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. 
(b)	Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, a wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within ten days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the superintendent and city manager by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user's liability for any violations before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)	Show cause hearing. The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city engineer why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the committee regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the committee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 20 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(d)	Citation to municipal court. The city engineer or the director of public works may cite the user to municipal court for violation of any provision of this division. A violation of any condition of the user's wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed to be a violation of this division. 
(e)	Injunctive relief. Upon resolution of the city approving the filing of a suit, the city engineer shall in the name of the city file in the superior court of the county, or such other courts as may have jurisdiction, a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, damages, or other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of this division or other applicable law or regulation. Suit may be brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any action or inaction of any user or other person who causes or suffers damage to occur to the WWTP, or for any other expense, loss, or damage of any kind or nature suffered by the city. 
(f)	Assessment of damages to users. When a discharge of waste causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the facilities, or any expense of whatever character or nature to the city, the supervisor shall assess the expenses incurred by the city to clear the obstruction, repair damage to the facility, and any other expenses or damages incurred by the city. The city engineer shall file a claim with the user or any other person causing or suffering such damages to incur seeking reimbursement for any and all expenses or damages suffered by the city. If the claim is ignored or denied, the city engineer shall notify the city manager to take such measures as shall be appropriate to recover for any expense or other damages suffered by the city. 
(g)	City engineer may petition for federal or state enforcement. In addition to other remedies for enforcement provided herein, the city engineer may petition the state or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, as appropriate, to exercise such methods or remedies as shall be available to such government entities to seek criminal or civil penalties, injunctive relief, or such other remedies as may be provided by applicable federal or state laws to insure compliance by industrial users of applicable pretreatment standards, to prevent the introduction of toxic pollutants or other regulated pollutants into the WWTP, or to prevent such other water pollution as may be regulated by state or federal law. 
(h)	Fines for violation. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated any provisions of this division, he shall report said violation(s) immediately to the city manager. The city manager shall report and recommend to the mayor and council that a fine be levied on the user in the amount of $500.00. This fine may be imposed for each parameter violated for each day in the reporting period. Provided a first time violator is given a 15-day period to comply with the sewer service ordinance and any amendments and upon satisfactory compliance, the fine provided for herein will be waived. A user that has a repeat violation the following month for any parameter may be fined up to $750.00 for each repeat violation for each day in the reporting period. A user that has a continuing violation for the third consecutive month may be fined up to $1,000.00 for each repeat violation for each day in the reporting period. 
The city's desire is that all wastewater users comply with the discharge limitations set forth in section 98-114(h) and any other limitations specific to the user's permit, therefore continuing violations past the third consecutive month, without an acceptable plan and effort to correct the problem will result in termination of the user's sewer service. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 9; Ord. of 7-7-2008, § I)
Sec. 98-120. - Violations of division. 
(a)	Penalty. Any person or persons failing to comply with the lawful provisions of this division or doing any act prohibited hereby or failing to do any act mandated hereby shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment in such amounts as authorized, made or determined to be appropriate by the municipal court. 
(b)	Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2004, § 10)
Secs. 98-121—98-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND CHARGES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-161 et seq.
Sec. 98-131. - Water generally. 
The deposits, fees, rates and charges for taps and connections to the city water system and for water services provided by the city shall be as referred to in section 2-191 or as established from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1995, § 13.08.010)
Sec. 98-132. - Sewer generally. 
The deposits, fees, rates and charges to be paid by persons making taps and connections, and contributors, to the city sewerage system shall be as referred to in section 2-191 or as established from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
(Code 1995, § 13.20.140)
Sec. 98-133. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for each connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.040)
Sec. 98-134. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)	Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of the same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)	Nonpayment within 15 days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)	Nonpayment within 45 days from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)	Nonpayment for 30 days after the original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)	Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made, and a service charge established by the city council is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.090)
Sec. 98-135. - Suspension of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(1)	Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)	The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.	To prevent fraud or abuse.
b.	The consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules.
c.	Emergency repairs.
d.	Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control.
e.	Legal processes.
f.	Direction of public authorities.
g.	Strike, riot, fire, flood, or unavoidable accident.
(Code 1995, § 13.24.100)
Sec. 98-136. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)	The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee established by the city council; however, if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(2)	Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; however, if the meter is found to overregister beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)	If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1995, § 13.24.110)
Chapter 102 - ZONING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Planning and zoning, § 1.13(23).
Cross reference— Any ordinance relating to rezoning or amendments to a zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-6(a)(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; location of sexually oriented businesses, § 26-153; environment, ch. 46; historic preservation, ch. 54; recommendations and designation of historic districts and properties, § 54-61 et seq.; maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions, § 54-131 et seq.; planning, ch. 70; planning and zoning board, § 70-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 82; telecommunications, ch. 90.
State Constitution reference—Local planning and zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV.
State Law reference— Restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; zoning of condominiums, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-114; zoning of timeshare interval form of ownership, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-164; duration of covenants running with land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1—102-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Secs. 102-41—102-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE AND DESIGN REGULATIONS GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-81. - Use. 
No building or structure of land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.010)
Sec. 102-82. - Height and density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered to: 
(1)	Exceed the height limit;
(2)	House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or
(3)	Have a narrower or smaller front or side yards, or courts than are herein required.
(Code 1995, § 17.12.020)
Sec. 102-83. - Lot size and occupancy. 
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots in the same ownership at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or size of yards or lot area per family or any other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.030)
Sec. 102-84. - Yards and other space. 
No part of a yard or other open space or the off-street parking or loading spaces required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.040)
Sec. 102-85. - One principal building on a lot. 
Except group developments, only one principal building and its permitted customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.050)
Sec. 102-86. - Public street frontage. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut a minimum of 20 feet on a public street. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.060)
Sec. 102-87. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter except that the nonconforming structures or use shall not be: 
(1)	Changed to another nonconforming use;
(2)	Reestablished after discontinuance for one year;
(3)	Extend except in conformity with this chapter; or
(4)	Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.070)
Sec. 102-88. - Discontinuance of open-air uses. 
All nonconforming uses not carried on within a building except those which are incidental and necessary to activities within a building shall be discontinued within three years from the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or amendment thereto. Uses to be discontinued include but are not limited to outdoor sales areas, automobile parking lots, trailer courts, junk yards, storage yards, outdoor advertising signs, and similar uses, including small buildings incidental to such uses. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.080)
Sec. 102-89. - Unsafe buildings. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector, or from complying with his lawful requirements. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.090)
Sec. 102-90. - Pending application for building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof, for which as building permit has been granted prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided construction shall start within 60 days after the granting of such permit. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.100)
Sec. 102-91. - Vision clearance. 
In all use districts except the "B-1" central business district, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 12 feet shall be permitted within 60 feet of the intersection of the centerlines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
(Code 1995, § 17.12.110)
Sec. 102-92. - Walls and fences. 
(a)	Walls and fences shall be permitted in any zoning district and are not subject to setback requirements of the zoning ordinance of the city. The term fence as used in this section includes fence and privacy or security walls. 
(b)	Fences shall be erected only upon application to and with permit issues by the planning and zoning commission of the city. Said permit shall be issued upon application and payment of the required application fee. Said fence shall comply with all existing ordinances of the city and shall be constructed in such a manner as to not obstruct a view of adjoining property owners entering or leaving a public way or street. Adequate provisions shall be made for access of normal utility service, including garbage collection, water and other utility meters and mail delivery. No fence may interfere with required off-street parking. All wooden or structural fences must be constructed in such a manner that the exterior of the fence or the side of the fence visible to the public is the finished side of the fence. 
(c)	Walls or fences in residential zoning districts.
(1)	No wall or fence erected on an individual lot shall exceed eight feet in height within a side yard or rear yard, and must be constructed in such a manner that the exterior of the fence or the side of the fence visible to the public is the finished side of the fence. 
(2)	Fences within the required front yard must meet the following specifications and conditions:
a.	Must submit for consideration and approval to the planning and zoning commission, including application, picture of fence (i.e. drawing, sketch, brochure, manufacturer's literature, photograph or other pictorial document) and property survey showing the location of the fence, house and street frontage; 
b.	The maximum height of the fence or wall shall be three feet;
c.	Fence shall be constructed with natural wood, simulated wood, brick columns, fiber glass, or decorative ornamental iron only; 
d.	The distance between the pickets must be a minimum of two inches;
e.	The color of the fence must be natural wood colors, neutral colors, such as white, beige, ivory, cream off-white, or black, dark green wrought iron or the same color as the facade of the primary structure on the property; and, 
f.	The fence shall be maintained at all times by the property owner and/or occupant of the property. 
(3)	Any subdivision entrance, wall or fence shall not 12 feet in height and shall be subject to approval of the planning and zoning commission, of a landscape plan, site plan, structural plans, and architectural elevations. 
(4)	Electric and barb wire fences shall be prohibited in all residential areas.
(5)	Fences and walls along common areas, detention ponds, recreational areas and such areas shall be maintained all times by the home owners association and/or residents/property owners within that particular section of the subdivision/community serving the purpose thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2007(1), § I)
Secs. 102-93—102-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES 

Sec. 102-116. - Off-street automobile parking. 
No structure hereinafter shall be erected nor any of the following uses shall be established unless the minimum number of parking spaces as specified below are provided. Each parking space shall be at least 200 square feet and shall have access for vehicles to a public street. Parking lots for more than five vehicles shall provide sufficient turning space to prevent cars from backing into the street. 
(1)	Automobile repair garages: One space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(2)	Funeral parlors: One space for each four seats in the chapel.
(3)	Gasoline filling stations: Ten spaces for each grease rack or similar facility.
(4)	Hospitals and nursing homes: One space for each five beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees including nurses. 
(5)	Hotels: One space for each two guest bedrooms plus one space for each four employees.
(6)	Industrial establishments: One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus one for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(7)	Lodges and clubs: One space for each eight members.
(8)	Offices: One space for each 300 square feet of floor space.
(9)	Places of amusement or public assembly without fixed seats: One space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use. 
(10)	Places of amusement or public assembly with fixed seats: One space for each four seats in the main assembly hall. 
(11)	Residential: Two spaces for each dwelling unit.
(12)	Restaurants: One space for each four chairs, plus one space for each four employees.
(13)	Retail business: One space for each 200 square feet of sales area.
(14)	Boarding and rooming houses: One space for each two guest rooms.
(15)	Schools: One space for each 30 pupils in primary schools, one space for each four students in high schools and one space for each student in higher education, plus additional space for each employee. 
(16)	Tourist courts and motels: One space for each accommodation.
(17)	Trailer parks: One space for each trailer.
(18)	Wholesale business: One space for each 300 square feet.
(Code 1995, § 17.16.010)
Sec. 102-117. - Location on other property. 
If the required automobile parking spaces cannot be provided on the same lot where the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property provided that such property lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 1995, § 17.16.020)
Sec. 102-118. - Extension of parking space in residential districts. 
Required parking space may extend up to 100 feet into a residential district; provided, that the parking space adjoins commercial or industrial district and has its only access on the same street as the property for which it serves and is separated from abutting residences by a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide. 
(Code 1995, § 17.16.030)
Sec. 102-119. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
On every lot on which a business, trade, or industry is hereafter established, space with access to a public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley. 
(1)	Retail business: Ten percent of the floor area.
(2)	Wholesale and industrial: Five percent of the floor area.
(Code 1995, § 17.16.040)
Secs. 102-120—102-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-146. - Official zoning map. 
The official zoning map of the city shall be a comprehensive parcel map of the city depicting the various zoning districts as defined in the code of ordinances. The of zoning map shall be located in the office of the city clerk in City Hall and available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
All duly enacted amendments to the zoning map since the last ratification shall be so designated in the revised zoning map and upon adoption and ratification by the city council shall become a part of the official zoning map and included as a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 7-1-2013, § I; Ord. of 9-2-2014, § I)
DIVISION 2. - R-1A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-156. - Use requirements for a single-family residential district R-1A. 
(a)	The single-family residential district R-1A allows up to four dwelling units per acre with provisions for customary accessory use. Commercial, industrial or other uses that would interfere with residential character of this district are prohibited. All buildings shall conform to the minimum requirements for setbacks and height in section 102-226. 
(b)	Within the R-1A residential districts the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Single-family dwellings.
a.	Minimum square footage required shall not be less than 1,000 square feet.
(2)	Public and private schools offering general education courses.
(3)	Churches; provided that:
a.	They are located on a major collector street;
b.	The buildings are placed not less that 50 feet from any property line; and
c.	There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines. 
(4)	Public and semipublic recreation facilities and grounds.
(5)	Customary incidental home occupations including the office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, artist, musician, architect, engineer, or the accommodation of not more than two boarders or roomers; provided, there is no external evidence of such occupation except an announcement or professional sign not more than two square feet in area and that the operations are conducted within a dwelling by not more than one person in addition to those persons living therein and the place occupied is a part of the house. 
(6)	Customary accessory buildings, including private garages and non-commercial greenhouses and workshops; provided, they are located in the rear yard and not closer than five feet to any lot line. 
(7)	Nursery schools or kindergartens provided that there are at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area for each child and the play area is enclosed by a woven wire fence at least five feet high. 
(8)	Church bulletin boards not exceeding 12 square feet in area.
(9)	Signs not more than eight square feet in area advertising the sale or rental of the property on which they are located. 
(10)	Electric transformers or gas regulator stations, if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located provided that: 
a.	The structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line;
b.	No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises;
c.	The lot is suitably landscaped; and
d.	There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines. 
(11)	Railroad lines and passenger stations.
(12)	Agriculture but not including the commercial raising of livestock or poultry.
(13)	Subdivision signs with area not more than 30 square feet, one sign for each subdivision to be located on the subdivision site. 
(Code 1995, § 17.20.010)
Secs. 102-157—102-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-166. - Use requirements for single-family residential district R-1B. 
(a)	Within the R-1B district, any use permitted in the R-1A residential district is permitted.
(b)	The single-family residential district (R-1B) allows up to five dwelling units per acre with provisions for customary accessory building. 
(c)	Commercial, industrial or other uses that would interfere with residential character of this district are prohibited. 
(d)	All buildings shall conform to the minimum requirements for setback and maximum height in section 102-226. 
(e)	The minimum square footage required shall be no less than 800 square feet for dwellings in R-1B single-family residential districts. 
(Code 1995, § 17.24.010)
Secs. 102-167—102-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-176. - Use requirements for two-family residential district R-2. 
(a)	The two-family residential district (R-2) allows up to eight dwelling units per acre for single-family or two-family dwelling units with provisions for customary accessory use. 
(b)	All buildings shall conform to minimum requirements for setback and maximum height in section 102-226. 
(c)	Within the R-2 residential districts the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Any use permitted in the R-1B residential districts.
(2)	Two-family dwellings.
(Code 1995, § 17.32.010)
Secs. 102-177—102-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-186. - Use requirements for multi-family residential district R-3. 
(a)	The multi-family residential district (R-3) allows up to 20 units per acre with provisions for customary accessory use. 
(b)	All buildings shall conform to minimum requirements for setback and maximum height in section 102-226. 
(c)	Within the R-3 residential districts the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Any use permitted in the R-2 residential districts.
(2)	Row houses.
(3)	Apartment houses.
(4)	Apartment hotels.
(5)	Boarding and rooming houses.
(6)	Nursing homes and hospitals.
(7)	Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for a profit; provided that:
a.	They are located on a major or collector street;
b.	The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from the property line; and
c.	There is a planted buffer strip of ten feet wide at least along the side and rear lot lines. 
(8)	Trailer courts; provided, that:
a.	They contain a minimum of eight acres;
b.	The minimum square per trailer is 2,000 square feet;
c.	There is at least 15 feet between trailers; and
d.	Water, sewer and electric connections are furnished to each trailer location.
(Code 1995, § 17.36.010)
Secs. 102-187—102-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-196. - Use requirements for the central business district B-1. 
(a)	All buildings shall conform to the minimum requirements for setbacks and height in section 102-226. 
(b)	Within the B-1 central business district the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Any retail business or service including the incidental manufacturing of products sold at retail on the premises, provided that the manufacturing area does not occupy more than 20 percent of the total floor area nor employ more than five persons. 
(2)	Accessory uses and structures.
(3)	Advertising signs/billboards.
(4)	Auto washing establishments.
(5)	Bakeries.
(6)	Banks.
(7)	Church, public sign/billboards.
(8)	Churches.
(9)	Clinic.
(10)	Clubs country.
(11)	Community/government buildings.
(12)	Day nurseries/kindergartens.
(13)	Dry cleaning/laundry.
(14)	Fences.
(15)	Florist shop/greenhouse.
(16)	Fraternities/sororities.
(17)	Garage parking/public.
(18)	Gardens—Vegetable/flower.
(19)	Golf course—Private/public.
(20)	Hospital animal.
(21)	Hospital/sanitarium.
(22)	Hotel/motel.
(23)	Laundries/self service.
(24)	Libraries.
(25)	Lodges.
(26)	Mortuary/funeral homes.
(27)	Nursing homes.
(28)	Offices/office buildings.
(29)	Parking lots auto.
(30)	Pools public.
(31)	Printing/publishing/engraving.
(32)	Public utility structures.
(33)	Radio/TV studio.
(34)	Recreational facilities.
(35)	Restaurants/drive-in.
(36)	Sales appliance/furniture.
(37)	Sales auto parts.
(38)	School bus/commercial.
(39)	Services general.
(40)	Services repair/miscellaneous.
(41)	Shops electric repair.
(42)	Shop repair.
(43)	Stores hardware.
(44)	Stores retail.
(45)	Theaters.
(46)	Garages/repair.
(Code 1995, § 17.40.010)
Secs. 102-197—102-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - B-2 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-206. - Use requirements for local business district B-2. 
(a)	All buildings shall conform to the minimum requirements for setbacks and height in section 102-226. 
(b)	Within the B-2 local business districts the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Any retail business or service customarily serving residential neighborhoods or oriented to the highways. 
(2)	Gasoline service stations, provided that all structures including storage tanks shall be placed not less than 25 feet from the nearest intersecting street lines. 
(3)	Bowling alley.
(4)	Bus terminals.
(5)	Frozen food lockers.
(6)	Gasoline service stations.
(7)	Milk distributing station.
(8)	Sales farm implements.
(9)	Sales small boat.
(10)	Sales used cars.
(11)	Sales/display/auto/trailers.
(12)	Shooting ranges.
(Code 1995, § 17.44.010; Ord. of 9-8-2009(2), § I)
Secs. 102-207—102-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - B-3 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-216. - Use requirements for heavy industrial district B-3. 
(a)	All buildings shall conform to the minimum requirements for setbacks and height in section 102-226. 
(b)	Within the B-3 heavy industrial district the following uses are permitted:
(1)	Any use permitted in B-2 local business district.
(2)	Fabrication wood/metal.
(3)	Industrial uses plants.
(4)	Manufacturing plants/industrial.
(5)	Greenhouse/horticultural/nurseries.
(6)	Laboratory experimental/film/test.
(7)	Plants ice and cold storage.
(8)	Storage yard coal/wood.
(9)	Storage yard lumber/construction.
(10)	Storage yard petroleum products.
(11)	Textile manufacturing/processing.
(12)	Theatre/drive-in.
(13)	Truck/transfer terminal.
(Code 1995, § 17.46.010)
Secs. 102-217—102-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ZONING DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 102-226. - Setback requirements—Area, yard and height requirements. 
SETBACK REQUIREMENTS IN FEET (F)
Front Yard Setback from Right-of-Way 

 
(a)	Corner lots must have an additional width of 15 feet along the side street line.
(b)	Detached, nonliving utility building shall require a rear yard setback of five feet.
(c)	Where a lot abuts any residential district there shall be a side or rear yard clearance of at least ten feet on the side and/or rear yard abutting the residential district. 
(d)	Upon any side or rear lot line which abuts a residential district there shall be a densely planted buffer strip at least six feet in height along the rear and/or side lot abutting the residential properties. No such buffer shall however, extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining residential lot. 
(e)	Whenever a building is built in an existing developed subdivision, the setback shall conform to existing setbacks, the above requirements notwithstanding. 
(f)	A minimum separation of 30 feet shall be required between all residential dwelling buildings located on the same lot; duplexes, apartments and shopping centers can be considered as a single building without separation. 
(Code 1995, § 17.48.010; Ord. of 4-2-2007(2), § I)
Secs. 102-227—102-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERMITTED USES AND PROHIBITED USES 

Sec. 102-236. - Summary of permitted uses. 

 
(Code 1995, § 17.52.010)
Sec. 102-237. - Requirements for prohibited uses. 
The following use shall not be permitted in any district: 
(1)	Hazardous waste disposal.
(2)	Explosive manufacture or storage.
(3)	Paper or paper pulp manufacture.
(4)	Garbage dumping.
(5)	Petroleum or its products refining of.
(6)	Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
(7)	Distillation of bones and glue manufacture.
(8)	Fertilizer manufacture.
(9)	Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(10)	Auto wrecking and junk yard.
(11)	Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
(12)	Coal tar products manufacture.
(13)	Acid manufacture.
(14)	Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of Paris manufacture.
(15)	Ammonia, chlorine, or bleaching power manufacture.
(16)	Fireworks manufacture.
(Code 1995, § 17.56.010)
Secs. 102-238—102-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 102-251. - Requirements for hardship variance. 
A hardship variance may be granted because of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon finding by the city council that: 
(1)	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topograpy. 
(2)	The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create personal practical difficulty and/or unnecessary personal hardship. Such circumstances must be extraordinary, exceptional and well documented. The burden of proof shall be upon the individual requesting a variance. All such variances may be limited to 12 months' duration. 
(Code 1995, § 17.60.010)
Sec. 102-252. - Other variances. 
From time to time variances as to lot size, setbacks, area requirements, yard requirements, density requirements and use requirements may be granted by the city council. It is the purpose of this section to allow certain variances as may be appropriate. In considering such a variance the city council shall at all times consider and evaluate any request for a zoning variance utilizing the following criteria: 
(1)	The continued integrity of the zoning classification.
(2)	The benefit to the applicant as well as any detriment to the adjoining landowners and other neighbors. 
(3)	The existence of other zoning variance in the same neighborhood or area.
(4)	The purpose of the zoning variance.
(5)	The affect of the proposed variance on water supply, traffic, public safety, and the extension of other public utilities. 
In granting any variance the city council may impose such restrictions and conditions of the variance as are appropriate. 
(Code 1995, § 17.60.010)
Secs. 102-253—102-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. of Sept. 3, 2002 set out provisions intended for use as §§ 19-1—19-9. For purposes of classification, and at the direction of the city, these provisions have been included as Art. IX, §§ 102-266—102-274.
Sec. 102-266. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "City of Lavonia, Georgia Manufactured Housing Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 102-267. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and regulations to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of Lavonia, Georgia. It is the intent of the city to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family as defined herein, in both R-1 and R-3 residential districts, with exception of the National Register Historical Districts as defined in section 102-270. All manufactured homes shall be subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to insure similarity in exterior appearance between such residentially designed manufactured homes and site-built dwellings which have been constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same district, zoning classifications, or general residential area. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 102-268. - Basic definitions. 
New or pre-owned manufactured homes (in general) means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Type 1—SW manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one section, which, in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area and is commonly called a "single-wide manufactured home". 
Type 2—DW manufactured home means a structure, transportable in two or more sections, which, in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site and permanently fastened together, is 320 or more square feet in floor area per section and is commonly called a "double-wide manufactured home". 
Type 3—PO (pre-owned) manufactured homes means any manufactured home, either SW or DW, that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 10-4-2010, §§ I, II)
Sec. 102-269. - Manufactured homes as single-family dwellings. 
Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single-family shall be allowed in R-1 residential zoning districts with the exception of the National Register Historical Districts as defined in section 102-269, and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to requirements set forth in this article. 
Compatibility standards for manufactured homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family are as follows: 
(1)	Type 2—DW and Type 3—PODW manufactured homes qualifying as a dwelling, single-family shall be compared to site built and other housing in the immediate general area within the same zoning or residential district. Approval shall be granted upon finding that the manufactured home is substantially similar or superior in size, siding material, roof material, foundation, and general aesthetic appearance to site built or other forms of housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this article, or existing development, or proposed development in the same area. 
(2)	All manufactured homes qualifying as a dwelling, single-family shall meet or exceed the appearance standards as set forth in section 102-274 of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 10-4-2010, § III)
Sec. 102-270. - Lavonia historical districts. 
No manufactured homes of any type will be allowed to locate or relocate within the boundaries of the National Register Historical Districts located on Roberts Street, West Avenue, Jones Street, Vickery Street, Hartwell Road, the Downtown Local Business District, or any proposed or future designated historical districts within the R-1 Residential zoned areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 102-271. - Manufactured home permit (building permit) required. 
Any owner of a manufactured home, whether locating or relocating said manufactured home within the city shall file a manufactured Home Permit Application package as defined in subsection 102-272(d)(1) with the city clerk at city hall and pay the applicable fees as established by the mayor and council for a manufactured home permit (building permit). 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002)
Sec. 102-272. - Administrative procedures for manufactured home permit. 
(a)	Only HUD Code-approved manufactured homes as defined in section 102-268 will be permitted to locate or relocate within the city for residential purposes. Furthermore, no such manufactured home shall be located into the city to be used for any purpose other than occupancy by its owner as his or her principal place of residence. 
(b)	Minimum health and safety requirements. Every pre-owned manufactured home shall undergo an on-site pre-moving inspection by the city building inspector to certify compliance with the provisions of this section, including the following ten health and safety requirements, before being approved to relocate into the city and issued a certificate of occupancy: 
(1)	HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)	Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)	Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)	Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)	Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)	Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(7)	Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)	Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)	Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)	Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(c)	Site requirements. 
(1)	Type 1—SW. All Type 1—SW single-wide manufactured homes shall be located in a designated manufactured home community or park zoned as R-3, multi-family. Single-wide manufactured homes are not allowed in any other residential zone within the city. 
(2)	Type 2—DW. All Type 2—DW manufactured homes shall be located in an R-1 single-family residential zone, not within a designated historical district, and on an approved site where the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(3)	Type 3—POSW. All Type 3—POSW single-wide pre-owned manufactured homes shall be located in a designated manufactured home community or park zoned as R-3, multi-family. Single-wide manufactured homes are not allowed in any other residential zones within the city. 
(4)	Type 3—PODW. All Type 3—PODW double-wide pre-owned manufactured homes shall be located in an R-1 single-family residential zone, not within a historical district, and on an approved lot where the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(d)	Application procedure. No manufactured home shall be moved into or within the city and occupied for residency until the six conditions outlined below have been satisfied in accordance with established administrative procedures: 
(1)	Manufactured home permit application package. The manufactured home permit application package must include the following items: 
a.	Completed application form.
b.	Copy of the proposed site plan including setbacks, garages, utility sheds.
c.	Septic tank permit (only if city sewer service is not available).
d.	Approved application for city water/sewer service.
e.	Receipt for applicable application fees paid.
f.	Receipt for applicable utility service deposits paid.
The completed application package must be submitted to the city building inspector for review and approval. Final approval by the mayor and council at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting held on the first Monday evening of each month shall be needed before any work progresses. 
(2)	City sewer service/septic tank. The Lavonia Water/Sewer Superintendent must approve all city sewer service taps. If city sewer service is not available at the site, a septic tank permit must be obtained from the Franklin County Health Department and a septic tank installed for sewerage disposal. 
(3)	Tax decal. Once the city clerk has issued a manufactured home permit, a valid tax decal must be obtained from the Tax Commissioner's Office of Franklin County and attached to the manufactured home. 
(4)	Final installation. Final installation must comply with section 102-273 as enumerated below to obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city building inspector. 
(5)	Final inspection. The city building inspector shall conduct a final inspection of the site and manufactured home installation and shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the standards for manufactured home installation enumerated in section 102-273 have been met. 
(6)	Certificate of occupancy. No person may occupy a manufactured home without a certificate of occupancy issued by the city building inspector. A certificate of occupancy will be issued within five business days after the satisfactory final inspection by the city building inspector. Final utility connections will not be completed by any utility provider until this certificate has been issued. 
The above requirements do not apply to recreational vehicles, as they are not acceptable for permanent occupancy and may only be used as a temporary residence a maximum of 30 consecutive days. All recreational vehicles located at any residence within the city limits must display a current Georgia tag and registration. A manufactured home permit (building permit) will not be issued for recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 10-4-2010, §§ IV, V)
Sec. 102-273. - Manufactured home installation requirements. 
(a)	Utility connections all manufactured homes must be permanently connected to water, sewerage, and electrical service. 
(1)	Water. Water must be either from the Lavonia Water System or a well located on site if city water service is not available. Connections procedures must meet the most current International Plumbing Code requirements and must be freeze proof and belowground. The city building inspector must inspect all water connections. 
(2)	Sewer. All plumbing of the septic tank system must meet the International Plumbing Code and/or all Franklin County Health Department requirements and inspections. All plumbing for a city sewer connection must be approved by the city water and sewer superintendent and inspected by the city building inspector. 
(3)	Electrical. Electrical service must meet the requirements of the most recent International Electrical Code. All electrical connections must be inspected and approved by the city building inspector before issuance of the certificate of occupancy to the servicing power company for installation of permanent power service to the manufactured home. 
(b)	Hauling mechanisms. The transportation mechanisms including the wheels, axles, hitch, and any other device or devices used in the transportation of the manufactured home to the site must be removed prior to final setup and skirting. 
(c)	Footings/foundations/pier systems/skirting/tie-downs/steps and landings. All manufactured homes must be installed on a pier system, installed with permanent skirting, secured with tie down devices, and provided with steps and landings. 
(1)	Footings. All piers shall be placed on a footing of solid concrete not less than 24 inches by 24 inches by six inches deep on compacted or undisturbed soil. (24" × 24" × 6"). 
(2)	Foundations. All permanent foundations must be installed according to the manufactured home installation specifications and the International Building Code. 
(3)	Pier systems. Piers or load-bearing supports or devices shall be designed and constructed as per the manufactured home installation instructions to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall be securely attached to the frame of the manufactured home or shall extend at least six inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load-bearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as follows: 
a.	Piers less than 40 inches in height shall be constructed of open or closed cell, eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch concrete blocks with the open cells vertically placed upon the footer. Single-stacked block piers shall be installed with the 16-inch dimensions perpendicular to the main frame. The piers shall be covered with a two-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch pressure treated wood or concrete cap. 
b.	Piers between 40 and 72 inches in height and all corner piers over three blocks high shall be double-blocked with blocks interlocked and capped with four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block or equivalent. 
c.	Piers up to a maximum allowable height of 80 inches shall be constructed in accordance with the previous requirements and shall also be laid in concrete mortar and steel-reinforcing bars inserted into the block cells and then filled with concrete. 
(4)	Skirting. The entire perimeter between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, or finished concrete. All skirting shall be installed according to the manufacturers' installation and instructions so that the entirety of the perimeter of the undercarriage of the manufactured home is enclosed except for proper ventilation and/or access openings. 
(5)	Tie-downs. Each manufactured home shall have tie-downs or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home as per the Installation of Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes Rules and Regulations established and published by Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner (O.C.G.A. 8-2-160 et seq.). 
a.	The requirements for units 14 feet and less in width include two types of anchorage; over the top tie-downs to restrict overturning and frame tie-downs to restrict the unit from being pushed from its piers. 
b.	The requirements for units over 14 feet in width (commonly called "double-wides") require frame tie-downs only. 
(6)	Steps and landings. Steps and landings are required at each exterior doorway and shall be constructed to the standards of the International Building Code for stairway and landing construction. Landings constructed at front entry doorways must be a minimum of 48 inches by 72 inches (48" × 72"); and rear entry doorways, a minimum of 36 inches by 48 inches (36" × 48"). All landings shall extend a minimum of six inches beyond the edges of each exterior doorway. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 11-3-2003(2); Ord. of 10-4-2010, § VI)
Sec. 102-274. - Appearance standards. 
Appearance standards shall apply to all single-family dwellings including site-built homes, industrialized housing, and manufactured homes. Approval shall be granted upon the finding by mayor and city council that such development shall meet or exceed the following appearance standards: 
APPEARANCE STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS 

 
LEGEND 
1.	The roof shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition shingles, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, metal, built-up gravel materials, or other such materials as recommended by the city building inspector and approved by the mayor and city council. 
2.	The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, metal, vinyl, masonite, or other materials of like appearance. 
3.	The permanent foundation shall meet the requirements of the International Building Code. For a Type 2—DW or Type 3—PODW manufactured home, a masonry curtain wall unpierced except for the required ventilation and access must be installed so that it encloses the area under the manufactured home to the ground level. 
4.	For manufactured homes: all towing devices such as wheels, axles, and hitches must be removed before final installation. 
5.	For manufactured homes: at the front entry doorway there must be a landing that is a minimum of 48" × 72"; at the rear entry doorway there must be a landing that is a minimum of 36" × 48"; and each shall extend a minimum of 6" beyond the edges of the exterior doorway. 
6.	The single-family dwelling must be constructed according to the standards established either by the state minimum standard codes as amended from time to time for site-built homes, or by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act for manufactured homes, or the State of Georgia Industrialized Building Act for residential industrialized buildings. Each of these codes shall be applicable to the specific structure to which it applies. 
(Ord. of 9-3-2002; Ord. of 10-4-2010, §§ VI, VII)
Secs. 102-275—102-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-MIXED USE 

Sec. 102-281. - Purpose. 
(a)	P-M zoning districts are intended to:
(1)	Encourage the development of large tracts of land (defined as not less than 3 acres nor more than ten acres) as planned neighborhoods, communities, or mixed use development. 
(2)	Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning.
(3)	Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open areas within residential areas. 
(4)	Create a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of other sections of this article. 
(5)	Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets as well as lower development and housing costs. 
(6)	Provide an environment of stable character which is compatible with surrounding areas.
(b)	Within the planned area, a variety of land uses may be permitted in an orderly relation to one another and to existing land uses. This may be accomplished through the application of sound comprehensive planning principles. 
(c)	Subject to the requirements of this article a P-M zoning district may be established for a business district, a residential district, or a mixed use district consisting of both business and residential uses, i.e. loft apartments. 
(d)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the three residential National Register Historical Districts of the city as they currently are defined, or the proposed residential district of Hartwell Road for future designation as a National Register Historical District are excluded as eligible areas for consideration as a P-M zoning district. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(2))
Sec. 102-282. - Determining if an area is suitable for inclusion within a P-M district. 
The factors contained in section 102-281, as well as data submitted with the development plan of the applicant or a planned development, must be thoroughly considered by the planning commission as well as the mayor and city council when determining in which zoning district an area of land is to be placed. This will assure that rational comprehensive planning principles encourage the development and preservation of land use patterns that provide healthful and safe living conditions for the residents of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(2))
Sec. 102-283. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses shall be as shown in the approved development plan. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(2))
Sec. 102-284. - Plan review and approval procedures. 
(a)	Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a P-M, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the zoning administrator and the planning commission in order to review the general character of the plan (on the basis of tentative land use sketch if available), and to obtain information on development standards and ordinances affecting the proposed project. 
(b)	Submission of application for P-M approval. 
(1)	The applicant must file a petition with the zoning administrator for approval of the proposed P-M. This application must be supported by a development plan and a written summary of intent. The relationship between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both existing and proposed, must be shown. The following information must be presented with the application: 
a.	A general location map.
b.	Existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than five feet based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods. 
c.	The existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of all buildings and structures. 
d.	The approximate location of existing and proposed streets.
e.	The approximate location of all existing and proposed utilities, including a preliminary utility and drainage plan. 
f.	The present zoning pattern in the area.
g.	A legal description of the subject property.
h.	The location and use of existing and proposed public, semi-public, and community facilities such as schools, parks, and open areas on the site. This includes areas proposed to be dedicated or reserved for community or public use. 
i.	Perspective drawings of representative building types; however, this is not required for single family detached dwellings. 
(2)	Additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
a.	An off-street parking and loading plan.
b.	An economic feasibility report or market analysis.
c.	A traffic study of the area, and a circulation plan within the proposed development as well as to and from existing streets adjacent to the site. 
(3)	The written summary of intent submitted with the development plan must include the following information: 
a.	A statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development.
b.	An explanation of the character of the proposed development; this includes a summary of acres, number and types of dwelling units, and gross density by type of land use. 
c.	A general statement of the proposed development schedule.
d.	Agreements, provisions, and covenants which govern the use, maintenance and protection of the development and any common or open areas. 
(c)	Review and approval of P-M application. 
(1)	An application for approval of a P-M is treated administratively as an application for an amendment to this article (rezoning). This is because P-M districts are created only upon request of a developer whose application materials demonstrate a firm commitment to construction of a well-designed P-M. Upon approval of the P-M, existing zoning must be changed to a P-M zone, which is an amendment to the ordinance. The amendment procedures contained in this Code must be followed in granting the amendment to permit the P-M. 
(2)	The zoning administrative officer will turn over the application materials to the planning commission for its recommendation. The planning commission will thoroughly study the materials and make written recommendations to the mayor and city council stating the reasons for its recommendations. 
(3)	The power to approve an amendment creating a P-M district rests with the mayor and city council. After conducting the public hearing and considering recommendations from the planning commission, the mayor and city council will then make an official decision on the proposed P-M. The mayor and city council may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the development plan. 
(4)	If the development plan is approved as submitted, the official map will be changed to indicate P-M district. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant must file with the zoning administrator the following: 
a.	Written notice of consent to the modifications.
b.	A properly revised site plan.
(5)	The official map will then be changed. The site plan and supporting information of any approved plan will be properly identified and permanently filed with the planning commission. 
(6)	No building permits will be issued by the building inspector until the development plan has been approved by the mayor and city council. 
(d)	Issuance of building permits. The building inspector will issue building permits for building and structure in the area covered by the approved development plan if proposed buildings and structures are in conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and all other applicable regulations. 
(e)	Revision of development plan after approval of plan. 
(1)	Minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structure may be permitted after review and approval by the zoning administrator; such changes must be consistent with the purpose and intent of the development plan. A request for a revision of the development plan must be supported by a written statement indicating the nature of the revision and the reasons it is considered necessary or desirable to revise the development. 
(2)	Any major or substantial change in the approved development plan which affects the intent and character of the development, the density of land use patterns, the location or dimensions of streets, or singular substantial changes must be reviewed and approved by the mayor and city council after receipt of recommendations from the planning commission. A request for a revision of the development plan must be supported by a written statement indicating the nature of the revision and the reasons it is considered necessary or desirable to revise the development. 
(3)	For the purposes of this section whether a change is minor or major shall be at the sole discretion of the zoning administrator. 
(f)	Approval of P-M revoked if construction not begun. Construction of the planned development must begin within one year of the approval of the P-M. If no construction has begun by then, or if the applicant fails to maintain the approved development schedule, approval of the development plan will lapse. At the discretion and for good cause, the mayor and city council may extend the period for beginning construction of any phase of the project for one additional year. If approval of the development plan lapses under this provision, the subject P-M district will be removed from the official map and the zoning districts and regulations which were in effect prior to the approval of the development plan will be reinstated. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(2))
Sec. 102-285. - Development standards for P-M districts. 
In addition to the development standards contained in this Code, the following standards may be required within P-M districts: 
(1)	Development plan. Approved development plan must be carried out. 
(2)	Density requirements. Density requirements or dwelling units per acre shall be determined by the planning commission and recommended to the city council for approval. The intent of density requirements for mixed use development is to allow higher densities along heavy traffic areas and roadways adjacent to more intense uses such as commercial or industrial development. The lesser density development requirements would be more compatible adjacent to single family or other residential development. 
Dwelling units per acre allowed: 
Five dwelling units per acre (lesser density). 
Seven and one-half dwelling units per acre (higher density). 
(3)	Deviation from required densities. 
a.	The mayor and city council may allow higher net or gross residential densities, as well as a higher density of a particular residential use, as long as the applicant can show that such a higher density will not be detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.	The mayor and city council will consider a deviation from the specified maximum density only upon a favorable recommendation from the planning commission. 
(4)	Dimensional and bulk regulations. The location of all proposed buildings and structures must be shown on the approved development plan; minimum lot sizes, setback lines, lot coverages, and floor areas shown on the development plan must be adhered to. The proposed location and arrangement of structures must not be detrimental to existing or proposed adjacent dwellings or to the development of neighborhood. 
(5)	Perimeter requirements. The mayor and city council upon recommendation of the planning commission, may impose the following requirements to protect the privacy of existing adjoining uses: 
a.	Structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the P-M must be set back a distance of 30 to 50 feet from the boundary of the P-M. 
b.	Mixed use development shall have a minimum percentage of gross acreage set aside as open space and shall provide recreational areas within said open space. 
(6)	Control of area after completion. After completion of a planned development, the use of land and the construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings or structures within the P-M must conform to the approved development plan. If community needs are found to be changing in the future and a revision of the approved development plan is thought to be needed, procedures outlined in the revision of the development plan after approval of plan must be followed. 
(7)	Sight distance. In order to assure maintenance of adequate sight distances at intersections, no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of three feet and 15 feet above the ground is permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way of streets or of street, and railroads. 
(8)	Applicability to land, buildings, and open space. No building, structure, land, or open space may be used or occupied-and no building or structure or part of a building or structure may be erected, constructed reconstructed, moved or structurally altered-unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
(9)	Every use must be on a lot. No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this article. 
(10)	Zero lot lines. Zero lot lines are permissible in the P-M district. 
(11)	Open space not to be encroached upon. No open space may be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and other such required development standards contained in the ordinance. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and buffers are not considered to be encroachments of yards. Open space areas as required by this article must be permanently maintained as open space in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(12)	Reduction of yards or lot area. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article derives may not be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this article for the district in which it is located unless that reduction or division is necessary to provide land which is needed and accepted for public use. 
(13)	Lots with multiple frontage. In case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, front yard setback requirements apply to all lot lines abutting a street. 
(14)	Landlocked lots. Landlocked lots are not eligible for placement within a P-M zoning district. 
(15)	Yards and other spaces. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street parking, or loading space required for one building may be included as a part of the yard, off- street parking, or loading space required for another building, except as specifically provided for in this article. 
(16)	Substandard lots. Substandard lots are not eligible for placement within a P-M zoning district. 
(17)	Encroachment on public rights-of-way. No building, structure, service area, required off-street parking, or loading/unloading facility is permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(18)	Physical design standards. Minimum design standards loading areas, and other such physical site improvements in applicable development regulations of this article. Consult the zoning administrator for specific requirements. 
(19)	Off-street parking and service requirements. Minimum standards for off-street parking and service requirements are contained in this article. Consult the zoning administrator for specific requirements. 
(20)	Other applicable development regulations. Information concerning any other applicable development regulations may be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
(21)	Signs. Minimum design and location standards for signs as required by the planning commission. 
(22)	Development standards shown in approved development plan. Other development standards shown in an approved development plan apply only to the development shown on the specific development plan. Such development standards must be maintained. 
(23)	Design standards for all P-M developments. 
a.	General. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage, and ground slope must not create hazards to the property, or to the health or safety of residents. The site must not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse conditions; and no part subject to flooding or erosion can be used for any purpose that would expose people or property to danger. 
b.	Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces throughout the development must be protected with a vegetative growth that prevents soil erosion, standing puddles, and dust. If this is not possible, such areas may be covered with a solid material such as stone, or may be paved. 
c.	Site drainage. The ground surfaces throughout the development must be equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner, either through grading or installation of drains. 
d.	Required buffer. A buffer may be required along all lot lines of the development. This is in addition to common open space. 
(Ord. of 8-6-2007(2))
Secs. 102-286—102-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MEDICAL CAMPUS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-300. - Purpose and scope. 
This section applies to the medical campus district (hereinafter referred to as MCD). The intent of the MCD is to encourage and foster the planning, design and construction of a well-functioning, attractive medical campus environment that: 
(1)	Encourages the development of medically-related uses which, by their interrelationship, benefit by proximity; 
(2)	Provides an appropriate and healing setting for delivering high quality healthcare services; 
(3)	Creates well-designed development with a unified feel while providing flexibility in placement and clustering of buildings, use of open space, provision for pedestrian and traffic circulation, parking, transit facilities and related site and design considerations; and 
(4)	Ensures future capacity for the placement of medical facilities to meet the evolving healthcare needs of the city and the region. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-301. - Permitted uses. 
Permitted uses are as follows: 
(1)	Professional, medical and administrative offices.
(2)	Medical or dental clinics for human care.
(3)	Diagnostic or imaging centers for human care.
(4)	Ambulatory surgery, urgent care or outpatient treatment centers.
(5)	Hospice services.
(6)	Laboratories performing medical or dental research, diagnostic testing or analytic clinic work having a direct relationship to the providing of health services. 
(7)	Essential support services.
(8)	Medical equipment supply, leasing or rental.
(9)	Pharmacies.
(10)	Banking and automated banking facilities.
(11)	Florist and gift shops.
(12)	Fast food restaurants, delis, coffee shops and sit-down restaurants.
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-302. - Permitted accessory uses. 
Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)	Exterior as an accessory use to the primary use. 
a.	Off-street parking and loading areas.
b.	Parking decks and ramps.
c.	Signs subject to chapter 6, Advertising. 
d.	Central utility plants and electrical generators.
e.	Public transportation facilities.
f.	Bicycle racks.
(2)	Interior as an accessory use to the primary use. 
a.	Day care (child and adult).
b.	Supporting retail and service uses up to 25 percent of the building's gross floor space including pharmacies, coffee shops, delis, flower shops, bookstores, gift shops, cafeterias, banking or automated banking machines and laundry or dry cleaning. 
c.	Community or meeting rooms.
d.	Wellness, fitness or exercise facilities.
e.	Educational facilities such as conference rooms, classrooms, or laboratories.
f.	Public transportation facilities.
g.	Chapels.
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-303. - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are allowed by conditional use permit: 
(1)	Planned unit or planned mixed-use developments.
(2)	Hospitals for human care.
(3)	Skilled nursing or rehabilitation facilities.
(4)	Mental health facilities.
(5)	Chemical dependency treatment facilities.
(6)	Nursing homes or long-term care facilities.
(7)	Guest houses for patients and families.
(8)	Ambulance or medical carrier services.
(9)	Helipads or helistops in conjunction with the hospital or EMS services.
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-304. - Compatible uses. 
Any other use not defined in sections 102-301—102-303 as deemed compatible and appropriate by the zoning administrator. Where a question arises as to the compatibility of a use, the zoning administrator shall refer the issue to the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall make a recommendation to the city council, which shall make a final determination as to whether a proposed use is to be allowed; is compatible as a permitted use or conditional use; is compatible as an accessory use; or is a use that may be added to a specific planned unit development within the medical campus district. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-305. - Construction design standards for the MCD. 
These medical campus standards are intended to encourage quality economic development projects, help to insure the safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and maintain the aesthetic environment of the city and the medical campus district through the adoption of compatible and quality design standards, while at the same time, accommodate the medical campus' unique character and site design elements. 
(1)	Height, setback and area requirements. 

 
(2)	Building construction materials. Only construction materials as defined in the MCD Project Planning Guide reviewed in the pre-application conference by the zoning administrator and city building inspector will be permitted. No metal buildings, either primary or accessory, will be allowed in the MCD. 
(3)	Site design elements. Landscaping, lighting, signage and other site design elements shall be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and shall contribute to a cohesive image and identity for the medical campus district. Sign standards are outlined in section 102-307. 
(4)	Pedestrian pathways. Internal and external pedestrian pathways including sidewalk and / or trail connections shall be provided by the developer for safe and convenient pedestrian movements. Provision for existing or future transit service shall be provided where appropriate. 
(5)	Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings shall exceed the height, floor space or footprint of a principal building. 
(6)	Outdoor display or storage. No outdoor display, sales or storage shall be allowed. 
(7)	Refuse and recycling. All waste material, refuse, garbage or recycling shall be kept indoors or screened enclosure constructed of the same materials as the principal structure and properly contained in a closed container or dumpster designed for such purposes provided by the city or its contract agent. 
(8)	Screening. The city shall require a suitable screening to be determined by the zoning administrator of any side or rear yard immediately adjacent to a residential district, assisted living facility, rehabilitation facility, or any other adjacent development determined by the zoning administrator to be offered screening protection. 
The zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, or city council may apply additional requirements as necessary to implement the purpose, integrity, and aesthetics of this medical campus district and the city comprehensive land use plan. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-306. - Planned unit developments/planned mixed-use developments. 
A planned unit or planned-mixed use development shall be required for any proposed development or redevelopment of three to ten acres within the MCD. Such developments shall conform to the requirements set forth in article X, Planned Development-Mixed Use, of this chapter. Any proposed development project consisting of more than ten acres must first submit a concept plan at the pre-application conference to the zoning administrator for consideration. This concept plan shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and passed on to city council for final approval before the applicant will be allowed to proceed with the preliminary project design plans. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-307. - Sign standards. 
The following sign standards shall apply for all sign categories within the MCD. 
(1)	General design standards. 
a.	Sections 6-31 through 6-40, sections 6-45 through 6-46(a), (b), (e), (f), (h), (k), (l), section 6-47, and section 6-51 of this Code shall apply to the MCD. 
b.	Signs shall be harmonious in color, material and lighting with the building to which it relates and shall be similar in quality and character throughout the MCD. 
c.	Internal or external illuminated signage shall be permitted. No sign(s) or sign illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed to cast a glare or direct light from artificial illumination upon adjacent publicly dedicated roadways or surrounding properties. 
d.	At such time that a wall sign is removed from a building façade and replaced with a new sign, the façade shall be restored to match the existing condition of the façade wall area prior to installation of a new sign in the same location. All previous mounting holes and ghosting images shall be removed and the façade repaired to match the existing condition of the building. The property owner shall be required to assume sole responsibility for the restoration of the building façade at the time the existing sign is removed. 
(2)	Gateway elements. Gateway elements on Clear Creek Parkway and Ross Place Connector shall be permitted on both sides of the entrance into the main MCD and any other planned unit or planned mixed-use development consisting of three to ten acres entrancing off the Clear Creek Parkway corridor. The only other gateway elements permitted shall be vehicular and pedestrian directional signage. 
(3)	Vehicular and pedestrian signs. 
a.	Directional signs directing traffic movement onto and within the MCD shall be identified as primary or secondary and shall be of a design and sign material consistent with state department of transportation standards. 
b.	Pedestrian directional signs shall be non-lit or internally illuminated as deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. 
c.	Landscaping shall be provided by the developer around any non-traffic directional signs and shall be a minimum of 40 percent evergreen and equal to at least 200 percent of the square footage of one sign face. Landscaping designs shall be included with the sign permit application for approval. 
(4)	Address identification signs. Signs identifying the number assigned to a building or business for the purpose of mail delivery, emergency services, etc. shall be permitted and located by the developer. Such signs shall not exceed 2.5 feet in sign height and shall be compatible in color and material as the building's other wall signs or building façade design. 
(5)	Building and tenant identification signs. Building and tenant identification signs shall be permitted not to exceed an aggregate sign area of two square feet per one horizontal linear foot of building/tenant façade frontage, or to exceed a total maximum sign area square footage per building frontage of 200 square feet. Monument signs located at the driveway entrance, awning signs and window lettering are also permitted. Stanchion or pole signs are not permitted for building or tenant signs. The following chart summarizes the various sign applications and allowable aggregate sign areas: 

 
(6)	Exempt signs. The following permitted signs shall not require sign permits: 
a.	Informational signs (freestanding or wall mounted) less than four square feet in sign area. 
b.	Trail or pedestrian pathway signage less than seven square feet in sign area and less than five feet in sign height. 
c.	Building directory signs that identify the occupants of a building near the building's entrance and less than six square feet in sign area. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
Sec. 102-308. - Plan review and approval procedures. 
The following procedures must be completed before a building permit will be issued by the city building inspector for any construction project within the MCD. 
(1)	Pre-application conference. Prior to filing for a building permit with the inspections department, the applicant (developer) must confer with the city building inspector and the zoning administrator regarding the general character of the proposed construction project. The MCD Project Planning Guide outlining suggested building designs, roof lines, construction materials, site design elements, and ordinances affecting the scope of the proposed project will be given to the applicant (developer) at this time. This planning guide will assist in the development of the preliminary project design package. 
(2)	Preliminary project design package. The preliminary project design package must contain the following items: 
a.	Plats and topo of the construction area.
b.	Site layout drawings including building location, curb cuts, ingress/egress, parking lot dimensions, green space, and stormwater containment. 
c.	Architectural overview.
(3)	Architectural overview. The architectural overview should include conceptual drawings of the proposed building(s), accessory buildings, landscaping buffers, refuse receptacles, signage, and external lighting of the proposed project and shall be included with the submission of the preliminary project design package. 
(4)	Application conference. The applicant (developer) shall present the completed preliminary project design package for review at the application conference. After review (generally seven to ten days) the city building inspector shall confer with the applicant (developer) as to the cities finding regarding the proposed project. Additional information may be requested by the city before the project is approved for a final building permit application package. 
(5)	Building permit application package. If the proposed project is found to be within the permitted uses of this article and in compliance with subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section, then a written approval for a building permit application package will be issued to the applicant (developer) by the city building inspector. The requirements for a building permit application in the MCD is the same as outlined in sections 102-284 and 102-285, planned development mixed-use for a P-M application. The building inspector and zoning administrator shall outline the required information in that code section that must be included in the application package. 
(6)	Building permit. A building permit and notice to proceed will be issued to the applicant upon final approval of the building permit application package by the zoning administrator and city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 3-7-2011)
APPENDIX A - STATE STATUTES PERTAINING TO MUNICIPALITIES 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR GEORGIA CITIES AND TOWNS 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. This reference list is up-to-date through July, 1995. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated by Book Publishing Company. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of municipal corporations 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-31 
Powers of municipal corporations generally 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-34 
Home rule 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2; O.C.G.A. ch. 36-35 
Annexation of territory 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-36 
Penalty limits 
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Administration and Personnel 
Officers generally 
O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-4—36-30-6, 36-30-9, 36-30-13 
Elections generally 
O.C.G.A. title 21 
Municipal elections 
O.C.G.A. ch. 21-3 
Ethics in government act 
O.C.G.A. ch. 21-5 
Public meetings 
O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1; O.C.G.A. ch. 50-14 
Ordinances not to bind succeeding councils 
O.C.G.A. § 36-30-3 
Municipal courts 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-32 
Liability for acts or omissions of officers 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-33 
Municipal training 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-45 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial provisions generally 
O.C.G.A. §§ 36-80-2—36-80-15, 36-60-7, 30-60-8 
Powers of taxation and expenditure 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 4 
Limits on taxing power 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2 
Limits on local debt 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 5 
Revenue bonds 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 6 
Budgets and audits 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-81 
Bonds 
O.C.G.A. chs. 36-38 and 36-82 
Local government investment pool 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-83 
Public work bids 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-84 
Interlocal risk management agencies 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-85 
Acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-37 
Grants of state funds 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-40 
Urban residential finance authorities 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-41 
Downtown development authorities 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-42 
City business improvement districts 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-43 
Redevelopment powers 
O.C.G.A. chs. 36-44, 36-61, 36-62, 36-63 
Immunity from antitrust liability 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-65 
Management and disposition of property 
O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2 
Business and occupation taxes 
O.C.G.A. ch. 48-13 
Fees and taxes on insurance companies 
O.C.G.A. ch. 33-8 
Special assessments 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Alcoholic beverages 
O.C.G.A. title 3 
Business and occupation taxes 
O.C.G.A. ch. 48-13 
Cable television 
O.C.G.A. §§ 36-18-3, 36-34-2 
Adult bookstores and theaters 
O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3 
Animals 
Animals generally 
O.C.G.A. title 4 
Dogs 
O.C.G.A. ch. 4-8 
Health and Safety 
Air quality control 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Public health facilities 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Facilities for treatment of patients 
O.C.G.A. § 36-34-4 
Fireworks 
O.C.G.A. ch. 25-10 
Garbage collection and disposal 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ 3 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
State criminal code 
O.C.G.A. title 16 
Prohibition on regulating conduct which is prohibited by state criminal law 
O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Vehicle code 
O.C.G.A. title 40 
Powers of local authorities 
O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-370—40-6-376 
Prosecution of traffic offenders 
O.C.G.A. ch. 40-13 
Abandoned and junked motor vehicles 
O.C.G.A. ch. 40-11; O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4 
Public transportation 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Street and sidewalk construction and maintenance 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Parks and recreation areas 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 3, ¶ 3 
Public Services 
Water and sewer systems 
O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5 
Library services 
O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5.1 
Buildings and Construction 
Building codes 
O.C.G.A. ch. 8-2 
Statewide application of minimum standard codes 
O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25 
Planning and Zoning 
Generally 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4 
Zoning procedures 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-66 
Zoning proposal review procedures 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-67 
Coordinated and comprehensive planning 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-70 
Development impact fees 
O.C.G.A. ch. 36-71 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1995 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1995 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1995 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1995 Code which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1995 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1995 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 