SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what legislation has been considered for codification in each supplement. Legislation that is of a general and permanent nature is codified in the Code and is considered "Included." Legislation that is not of a general and permanent nature is not codified in the Code and is considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
The Charter 
Article Ch.1 - Incorporation and Boundaries 

Section Ch.1.10 - Reincorporation. 
This Act shall constitute the whole charter of the City of Roswell, Georgia, repealing and replacing the charter approved in 1971 by Act No. 568 of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia and as amended from time to time by Act of the General Assembly or Home Rule. The City of Roswell, Georgia, in the County of Fulton, and the inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the "City of Roswell, Georgia", and by that name shall have perpetual succession and may exercise the powers enumerated herein and all those granted to such bodies. 
Section Ch.1.20 - Corporate Boundaries. 
The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on January 20, 2000, a complete legal description of such boundaries is attached hereto and set forth as Exhibit "A", and as same may be altered from time to time in accordance with applicable laws. The City Engineer or his designee shall prepare a map to be designated "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Roswell, Georgia," showing the corporate boundaries as the same may exist as of the date of adoption of this Charter. The City Engineer or his designee shall prepare a written description of the corporate boundaries as shown on said map. Said map and description shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk as the official map and description of the corporate boundaries of the city. Immediately upon alteration of the corporate boundaries made pursuant to law from time to time, the City Engineer shall indicate such alterations by making appropriate changes in or additions to said official map and description. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
Section Ch.1.30 - Extension of Corporate Boundaries. 
The corporate boundaries of the city may be changed, altered or extended from time to time, through annexation or deannexation in accordance with applicable general laws of the State of Georgia. The city clerk shall at all times keep a correct and complete description of recent annexations or deannexations and may maintain a map showing all annexations and deannexations. 
Article Ch.2 - Corporate Powers 

Section Ch.2.10 - Powers and Construction. 
(1)  All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies and employees, shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no such provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by pertinent, applicable general laws of Georgia and if not so provided in the general laws, then as provided by ordinance, resolution or other action of the Mayor and Council. 
(2)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Section Ch.2.20 - Corporate Powers. 
The corporate powers of the city, to be exercised by the city council, shall include the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate, license, tax, or prohibit, the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, in violations of any ordinance or lawful orders; to provide punishment for violations of ordinances enacted hereunder. 
(3)  Appropriation and expenditures. To appropriate and borrow money, to provide for payment of the debts of the city, and to authorize the expenditure of money for any municipal purpose or for matters of national or state interest. 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt the state minimum standard codes for building, housing, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, energy and others necessary for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for the failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as may be enacted. 
(7)  Contracts. To contract with other governmental entities for joint services or the exchange of services; to contract with such agencies or subdivisions for the joint use of facilities or equipment; and to contract with any such agency or subdivision and with private persons, firms, and corporations to perform any service or execute any project in which the municipality has an interest. 
(8)  Economic development. To levy taxes and to make appropriations for the purpose of advertising said city and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital, commercial, manufacturing and other enterprises into the city, and also to levy taxes and to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the city and for the support of public hospitals and libraries. 
(9)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees by imposing a lien against the property served if such fees are unpaid; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental or likely to be detrimental to the health, morals, safety, security, peace and convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the public streets of the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp, or jail, by agreement with the appropriate governmental officials. 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefore; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same. 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and to provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. The municipal court judge shall have jurisdiction over all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. The city council may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city, to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon his failure or refusal to abate the same within ten (10) days after written notice from the city to do so and after an opportunity to be heard on same. 
(22)  Ordinances, rules and regulations. To make, establish and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city provided that no ordinances shall be enacted inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, or the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(23)  Specific penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide penalties for the violation of Fulton County board of health rules and regulations and Fulton County health and sanitation ordinances. 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary in the interest of public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, aesthetics, prosperity, or general welfare, and for the purpose of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings, or other uses of property; or for the purpose of regulating the height and location of the buildings, fences or other structures; or for the purpose of regulating the alignment of buildings or other structures near street frontages; or for the purpose of preserving buildings, structures or areas having national, regional, state or local historic significance; or for the purpose of maintaining or improving the aesthetic appearance of any buildings, structures or areas. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one (1) or more of the purposes above described. The city may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as the mayor and councilmen of said city shall deem best to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations. 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police or firefighting agency. 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, public housing, sewers, sewage treatment, airports, hospitals, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport and curative, correctional, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide for any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services not to exceed periods of thirty-five (35) years, and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission. 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city. 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through and under any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city and to charge a rental therefore in such a manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charge and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items. 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, escort services and health spas by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult businesses, and massage parlors. 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements. 
(38)  Taxes—Ad valorem. To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, reevaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation for state and county purposes; and to contract with any city, county or other governmental and political subdivision for the ministerial acts of billing and collection of city ad valorem taxes, or other fees, assessments, or taxes, as the city council may by resolution authorize. 
(39)  Taxes—Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(43)  Redevelopment powers. To undertake and carry out community redevelopment, to create tax allocation districts, to issue tax allocation bonds, and to incur other obligations within the meaning of and as fully permitted under the provisions of Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as amended, and to exercise redevelopment powers as fully as the "Redevelopment Powers Law" may now or hereafter permit and not to limit any redevelopment powers permitted under the "Redevelopment Powers Law". 
(2010 Ga. L. (Act No. 527)) 
Section Ch.2.30 - Authority of officers and employees to exercise powers. 
The full faith and credit of the City of Roswell shall be behind all elected officers, appointed officers, employees, members of boards, commissions and authorities, and the city shall indemnify them, to the extent allowed by law, for all costs and judgments suffered as a result of any and all actions taken pursuant to their official capacity for the City of Roswell. 
Article Ch.3 - Government Structure 

Section Ch.3.10 - Establishment of City Government. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six (6) councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this Charter. 
Section Ch.3.20 - Vesting of Governing Authority. 
The mayor and council shall be vested with full legislative power. Through exercise of such power the city council may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city; may provide that the same person shall fill a number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
Section Ch.3.30 - Qualifications for Mayor and Councilmen. 
To be eligible for the office of mayor or councilman, a person must have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years prior to the date of the election; must meet the requirements of a qualified voter of said city, as prescribed by state law; must have been a bona fide resident of the City of Roswell for at least one (1) year prior to the date of the election in which he offers as a candidate, and shall continue to reside in the city during that member's period of service. 
Section Ch.3.40 - Posts. 
Those persons presently elected to office shall continue to serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified as provided by law. 
All councilmember positions shall be designated by post numbers one (1) through six (6). All candidates for election to councilmember positions shall designate at the time of qualifying the position to which they are seeking election. All positions are at large positions. Councilmember position now held by Paula Winiski is hereby designated as post one (1), councilmember position now held by Terry Joyner is hereby designated as post two (2), councilmember position now held by David Tolleson is hereby designated as post three (3), councilmember position now held by Kristen Riley is hereby designated as post four (4), councilmember position now held by Jerry Orlans is hereby designated as post five (5), councilmember position now held by Sally White is hereby designated as post six (6).The mayor and candidates for councilmember positions numbers four (4), five (5), and six (6) shall be elected in the November 2001 election. Candidates for councilmember positions numbers one (1), two (2), and three (3) shall be elected in the November 2003 election. 
Section Ch.3.50 - Terms of Office. 
The terms of office for the city council shall begin on the first Monday in January following their election and shall continue for four years and until their successors are elected. No person who has been elected to three or more four-year terms of office as mayor shall be eligible for election to the office of mayor. 
(2010 Ga. L. (Act No. 528)) 
Section Ch.3.60 - Terms of City Council. 
No person elected as a councilmember in the general municipal election of 2017, or any election thereafter, shall serve as a councilmember for more than three consecutive four-year terms of office and shall not include any partial term of office. No terms of office served prior to January 1, 2018, shall be considered in determining if a person has served more than three consecutive four-year terms of office. 
(2017 Ga. L ( Act No. 118 ) 
Section Ch.3.70 - City Council Meetings. 
The city council shall hold regular public meetings at a stated time and place as provided by ordinance. The city council shall meet in special sessions on call of either the mayor, or the mayor pro-tem and two (2) councilmen, when notice of which has been served on the other members personally or left at their residence at least twelve (12) hours in advance of the meeting. As an alternative method of notifying members, or in addition to personal notice, notice of a special meeting may be given by telephoning the other members. If the telephone method is used, the first order of business in the special session shall be to enter upon the minutes of the meeting an oath or affidavit of the mayor, or the mayor pro-tem and two (2) councilmen calling the special session, attested to by the city clerk or by any other member of the council, or any person authorized to administer oaths, containing a statement that each councilman was either notified personally by telephone by the person making the oath or affidavit or was not capable of being so notified by reason of lack of knowledge of his whereabouts, or his absence from the state, and the statement must contain the purpose for which the meeting is called. Any person who is found guilty of false-swearing as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71 in the above proceeding shall be punished as provided by law. Any action taken in a special session which was called by a person later found guilty of false-swearing regarding the telephone notice of any member shall be void, unless ratified unanimously at a regular city council meeting held after said person or persons are found guilty. A ratification of action taken in such a special session by the council prior to a conviction for false-swearing shall not be effective. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city council from bringing any matter up for consideration contained in a special session at a regular meeting of the city council. Any liability to the city arising from action taken by the city council pursuant to a special session in which telephone notice is given, and in which the person calling the meeting is found guilty of false-swearing shall be considered waived if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called or convened. Only the business stated in the written call or in the oath or affidavit required for telephone notice may be transacted at a special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. The city council shall exercise its powers in public meetings. 
Section Ch.3.80 - Continuance of Hearings. 
If a public hearing is set for a given date, and quorum is not then present, the hearing shall be continued until the next regular council meeting without further advertising. The city council may continue any public hearing without further advertising. 
Section Ch.3.90 - Mayor's Powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city government, presiding officer of the city council and responsible for the efficient and orderly administration of the city's affairs. He shall be responsible for the enforcement of laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and franchises in the city. He may conduct inquiries and investigations into the conduct of the city's affairs and shall have such powers and duties as specified herein or as may be provided by ordinance consistent with this Charter. 
As the chief executive the mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council. 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy. 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths. 
(4)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed. 
(5)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city any written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
(6)  Submit to the city council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city. 
(7)  Vote only in case of a tie on any motion, resolution, ordinance, or other question before the council and vote on any matter before a committee on which he serves. 
(8)  Obtain short term loans in the name of the city when authorized by the city council to do so. 
(9)  Appoint councilmembers to oversee and report on the functions of the various departments of the city. 
(10)  Require the members of the several departments of the city to meet with him at a time and place designated for consultation and advice upon the affairs of the city. 
(11)  Name qualified residents of the city to boards and commissions with approval of the city council. 
(12)  Make recommendations with respect to the employ or termination of city employees. 
(13)  Prepare or have prepared an agenda for each meeting of the city council which shall include all business submitted by the mayor, any councilmember, the city administrator and the city attorney. 
(14)  Fulfill and perform such other duties imposed by this Charter and duly adopted ordinances. 
Section Ch.3.100 - Mayor Pro-tem. 
Annually, by majority vote, at the first regularly scheduled meeting in the month of January, the council shall elect a mayor pro-tem from their members. Should the election result in a tie, the Mayor shall vote to break the tie. The mayor pro-tem shall serve for one (1) year or until another Mayor pro-tem is elected, provided a councilmember shall not be eligible to serve consecutive terms as mayor pro-tem. The mayor pro-tem shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's disability or absence. If the mayor pro-tem is absent because of sickness or disqualification, any one (1) of the remaining councilmembers, elected by the members present, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the mayor's duties. 
(Resolution No. 2004-01-03 dated January 5, 2004) 
Section Ch.3.110 - Compensation and Benefits. 
The city council may determine the salary of the mayor and councilmen by ordinance, provided the salary changes enacted shall not become effective until the first regular meeting after the next general election. Each councilman and the mayor, when authorized by the city council, and upon presentation of itemized vouchers, shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Section Ch.3.120 - Oath of Office. 
Before entering upon the discharge of duty each elected or appointed officer shall take and subscribe to the following such oath or affirmation: 
"I solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and of the State of Georgia; and that I will in all respects observe the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the City of Roswell, and I will well and truly perform the duties of the office of ___________, and that I will to the utmost of my skill and ability endeavor to promote the interest and property of said city, without fear, favor or affection. So help me God." 
Section Ch.3.130 - Voting When Personally Interested. 
Neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which he is personally interested. A member of the city council is personally interested in a matter if he or a member of his immediate family has a direct financial interest in the matter. 
Section Ch.3.140 - Quorum; Voting. 
Four (4) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, if presiding, may vote only in case of a tie, and the mayor may be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember. 
The affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this Charter. Changes to the Charter shall require four (4) affirmative votes. 
Section Ch.3.150 - Rules of procedure. 
The city council may, by ordinance, adopt rules and bylaws to govern the conduct of its business; including procedures and penalties for compelling the attendance of absent members. Such rules may include punishment for contemptuous behavior conducted in the presence of the city council. 
Section Ch.3.160 - Mayor's Veto. 
(1)  Except for council approval of appointments to committees, boards and commissions, the employment of any appointed officer, internal affairs, or matters which must be approved by the voters, the mayor may veto any action adopted by the city council. 
(2)  The veto must be exercised at the meeting following that at which the action was taken. 
(3)  An action vetoed by the mayor shall automatically be on the agenda at the next regular meeting of the city council for reconsideration. If the minimum number of councilmembers necessary to vote on overriding the veto are not present, the action may be continued until the next meeting at which the minimum number of councilmembers is present. Such action shall not become effective unless it is readopted by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of council within sixty (60) days of the veto. 
Section Ch.3.170 - Reserved. 
Section Ch.3.180 - City Legislation. 
Any action of the city council having a regulatory or penal effect or required to be done by ordinance under this Act, shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of at least a majority of those present and voting shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the city clerk shall number ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall place a copy into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the city clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions, and motions shall be filed and preserved by the city clerk. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations, now in force in the City of Roswell, Georgia not inconsistent with this Act, are hereby declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the mayor and city council. 
Section Ch.3.190 - Reading of Ordinances. 
No ordinance, except in the case of emergency, which shall be stated in the ordinance, shall be approved until the title of said ordinance shall have been read at two (2) city council meetings, provided that the beginning of said meetings be not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than sixty (60) days apart. Provided, however, that if the ordinance is being enacted to amend this Charter, it shall be read at two (2) consecutive regular meetings not less than seven (7) nor more than sixty (60) days apart. A copy of the entire ordinance shall be available to those in attendance at the meetings at which the title of said ordinance is read. 
Section Ch.3.200 - Codification of Ordinances. 
(1)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known as the City of Roswell, Georgia Code of Ordinances, and when same is adopted by the city council, the code shall be admitted in evidence in any of the courts of this state, upon certification by the city clerk. 
(2)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein and for incorporation in an electronic database. 
Article Ch.4 - Appointive Officers and Personnel 

Section Ch.4.10 - City Administrator. 
The mayor and council shall by majority vote appoint a city administrator and set his compensation and term of office. The city administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference given to his actual experience in and his knowledge of the duties of his office. He shall function as the chief administrative and budget officer of the city and shall be vested with the authority and responsibility to oversee and supervise the regular business affairs of the city. The city administrator shall exercise executive supervision over all city employees and departments and may head one (1) or more city departments as necessary. The city administrator may have such other duties as the mayor and council may require including functioning as the city clerk. 
Section Ch.4.20 - Department Heads and Appointed Officials. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or general state law, the directors of departments and other appointed officials of this city provided for by this Charter shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. Such directors and officials shall receive compensation as determined by mayor and council. 
Section Ch.4.30 - Removal of Department Heads and Appointed Officials. 
Unless otherwise specified, all appointive officers, heads of departments and subordinate employees shall be subject to removal or discharge by the person or body appointing them, with or without cause, at any time. 
Section Ch.4.40 - City Clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city clerk shall be responsible for keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the city council; attending meetings of the city council and preparing minutes of its proceedings at such meetings, including the names of members present and absent, the vote of each member on each question, each motion considered, and the text of each resolution or ordinance considered; preparing and certifying copies of official records in his office, for which fees may be prescribed by ordinance; and performing such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Section Ch.4.50 - City Attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorneys for services rendered to the city if such attorney is not an employee of the city. The city attorney or such assistant city attorneys may be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may, at the discretion of the city council, be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city, concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by him by virtue of his position as city attorney or as provided by the mayor and councilmen. 
Section Ch.4.60 - Personnel Policies. 
The city council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of a position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(6)  Political activity of officers and employees of the city. 
(7)  The employment of relatives of members of the city council. 
Section Ch.4.70 - Bond. 
The city council shall have the right to require bond from each appointive officer or employee of the city in such amounts as said city council may from time to time fix by ordinance or resolution and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of his office and accounting for all moneys, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such officer or employee; and all such bonds shall be signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the state, and the premiums accruing thereon shall be paid by the City of Roswell. 
Article Ch.5 - Elections and Removal 

Section Ch.5.10 - Georgia Election Code. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the election of all officials of the City of Roswell where provision is made for election by the qualified electors thereof, shall be conducted as to special or general elections in conformity so far as applicable with the provisions of the general election code at Title 21 Chapter 2 of the O.C.G.A. as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Whenever any time period established by said code is altered so as to change or supersede any time period provided herein, it shall be considered that the time periods provided herein will be correspondingly changed so as to avoid any conflict between this Charter and the general law of the state. 
Section Ch.5.20 - Qualifying. 
Qualification for municipal elections shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132(c)(3). 
Section Ch.5.30 - Election—Date and Conduct. 
The city council may authorize Fulton County to conduct elections on the city's behalf at such times as set forth in the General Election Code. 
Section Ch.5.40 - Runoff. 
The candidates for mayor and councilmen who receive a majority of the votes cast in said election shall be elected to a term of office for four (4) years and until his successor is duly elected and qualified. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such run-off shall be held at the time specified by state election law, unless such run-off date is postponed by court order. 
Section Ch.5.50 - Candidacy While on Council. 
The office of any member of city council shall be declared vacant upon such member qualifying for another state, county, or municipal elective office or qualifying for the House of Representatives or the Senate of the United States if the term of the office for which such official is qualifying for begins more than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such official's present term of office. 
Section Ch.5.60 - Restriction on Employment. 
(1)  Except as authorized by law, no elected official of the City of Roswell shall hold any other city office or position of employment within the city during the term for which such official was elected. 
(2)  No individual who is elected to the office of mayor, councilman, or chief judge of the municipal court, may hold any other office or position of employment of the City of Roswell for a period of six months after such individual ceases to hold such public office; provided this subsection shall not prohibit the mayor, councilmen, or chief judge of the municipal court from seeking reelection or from seeking election to another elective office of the City of Roswell. 
Section Ch.5.70 - Candidacy of Employee or Board Member. 
If a member of any board appointed by the city council, a city employee or appointive officer shall become a candidate for nomination or election to any City of Roswell public office, that person shall, upon qualifying for such office, forfeit the board position, employment or appointive office held, unless such prohibition is proscribed by state statute. 
Section Ch.5.80 - Qualification of Electors. 
Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector of members of the General Assembly under State law who has been a bona fide resident of the City of Roswell for ninety (90) days next preceding the election in which he desires to vote, or for such period as may otherwise be provided by the Georgia Municipal Election Code, shall be qualified to register as an elector in any city election held under this Charter. 
Section Ch.5.90 - Special Election. 
Any call for an election which is required to be made by the laws of this state shall be made by the city council. 
Section Ch.5.100 - Reserved. 
Section Ch.5.110 - Forfeiture of Office. 
An elected official shall forfeit his right to hold office if he: 
(1)  Is guilty of willful incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Fails at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this chapter or by law; 
(4)  Willfully violates any express prohibition of the City Charter; 
(5)  Abandons his office or neglects to perform the duties thereof; 
(6)  Fails to perform the duties of office as required by the City Charter or by state law. 
(7)  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of city council, unless such absence is excused by the presiding officer of the council. 
Section Ch.5.120 - Removal from Office. 
Removal of an elected officer who forfeits his office as described herein shall be accomplished by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Removal of an elected officer from office may be initiated by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice by the city clerk. Following the public hearing, a vote of city council shall be taken. The mayor shall vote unless he is the individual sought to be removed. Removal shall require a unanimous vote provided that the individual sought to be removed shall not be entitled to vote. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Fulton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; 
(2)  By order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section Ch.5.130 - Recall. 
The qualified voters of the city shall have the power to recall and remove from office any elected official of the city as provided by the Recall Election Act of 1989 O.C.G.A. § 21-4-1 et seq. 
Section Ch.5.140 - Vacancies. 
The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
A vacancy shall exist if the mayor or a councilman resigns, dies, moves his residence from the city, or the mayor or a councilman forfeits his office by being absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the governing authority, except if granted a leave of absence (excused) by the city council and such leave of absence (excused) is entered on the minutes; or if he is adjudged legally incompetent, or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the council from any cause other than the expiration of a term of office, the vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: 
(1)  If the vacancy occurs within twelve (12) months of the expiration of the term, but not within ninety (90) days prior to the regular city election, the vacancy shall be filled by the remaining members of the council electing a qualified person to serve out the unexpired term of office; provided, however, that at no time shall there be more than one (1) councilman so appointed holding office; and if a vacancy occurs on the city council with one (1) member so appointed on the city council, a special election shall be held within a period of sixty (60) days after the office becomes vacant pursuant to a call of a special election as provided by this Charter and state election law; if said election is called, the previously filled vacancy and the existing vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired terms. Provided, however, if a regular election for the city shall be held within three (3) months after the second vacancy occurs, the vacancy previously filled by appointment and the second vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired terms at such regular election. 
(2)  If the vacancy occurs within ninety (90) days prior to the regular city election, the vacancy shall be filled at such regular election under the same rules and regulations and provisions of law pertaining to the election of councilmen. 
(3)  If the vacancy occurs at any other time not provided for above, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election called for that purpose by the city council within a period of sixty (60) days after the office becomes vacant. It shall be the duty of the city council to publish notice of the special election in the official organ of the city once a week for the two-week period immediately preceding said special election. 
(4)  In the event a vacancy should occur in the office of the mayor, a special election shall be called and held in the manner prescribed by the Georgia Election Code as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, so long as the vacancy occurs at least three (3) months prior to the regular expiration date of the term. If the vacancy occurs within three (3) months of the expiration date, the mayor pro tem shall serve until the expiration date, and shall be authorized, during said period, to exercise all of the powers of the mayor provided by this Charter and the laws of this state. 
Article Ch.6 - Fiscal Administration 

Section Ch.6.10 - Fiscal Year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of every office department, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by action of mayor and council. 
Section Ch.6.20 - Preparation of Budget. 
(1)  The city council may provide a resolution on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of the annual operating budget, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
(2)  Budgets shall be prepared for the General Fund, Debt Service Fund, Water Fund, Sanitation Fund, E-911 Fund, Hotel-Motel Fund and any other special revenue fund as deemed necessary by the city council or mandated by state law. 
Section Ch.6.30 - Submission of Operating Budget to City Council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city administrator, with the approval of the mayor, shall submit to the city council a preliminary operating budget for the next fiscal year which shows the following: 
(1)  The estimated revenues and proposed expenditures. 
(2)  Such other information and data as may be considered necessary by the mayor and council. 
Section Ch.6.40 - Operating Budget. 
(1)  The city council may amend the proposed operating budget, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated revenues and the reserves of that fund. 
(2)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year on or before June 30. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as a city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Section Ch.6.50 - Capital Improvements Budget. 
(1)  On or before a date fixed by council, the city administrator, with the approval of the mayor may submit to the council a preliminary capital improvements budget with recommendations as to the means of financing such improvements. 
(2)  At the beginning of each fiscal year, the council may adopt an appropriation ordinance based on the proposed capital improvement budget, with such modifications as the council deems necessary or desirable. 
Section Ch.6.60 - Changes in Appropriations. 
(1)  The city council may amend the amount of appropriations contained in the current budget, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose. 
(2)  Procedures for the transfer of funds within a given fund may be established by resolution of city council. Said transfers shall not increase the appropriation to a department. 
Section Ch.6.70 - Unexpended Appropriations. 
At the end of the fiscal year, all unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current budget shall lapse into the appropriate fund as unexpended reserves. 
Section Ch.6.80 - Independent Audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. 
Section Ch.6.90 - Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. 
A comprehensive annual financial report based on the annual independent audit of all city funds shall be prepared for each fiscal year. 
Section Ch.6.100 - Reserved. 
Section Ch.6.110 - Property Taxes and Tax Levies. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, for providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. Following adoption of the annual budget the city council shall levy by ordinance or resolution such taxes as are necessary. 
Section Ch.6.120 - Tax Assessments. 
All property subject to taxation for state and county purposes assessed as of January 1, in each year, shall be returned on or before April 1. The city shall use the Fulton County assessing authority or such other authority as the city council may designate by ordinance. When the county assessing authority is used, the appeals shall also be processed by the county under its own rules or applicable state laws. If another authority is used appeals shall be processed by the city using the same process as the county. 
Section Ch.6.130 - Tax Due Date and Tax Bills. 
The city council by ordinance or resolution, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax. The due date and time period within which these taxes must be paid shall be established by resolution. Without a resolution to the contrary the tax due date shall be no later than December 31 of the tax year. The city shall send tax bills to taxpayers showing the assessed valuations, homestead exemptions if any amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties. Failure to send tax bills shall not, however, invalidate any tax. The city council by ordinance or resolution may provide the method of payment by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time due. When taxes are delinquent, a one time penalty of ten (10) percent in addition to a fi.fa. charge shall be added and thereafter. Such taxes shall be subject to the highest legal rate per annum authorized by state law from the due date until paid. On or after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the city shall have the force and effect of a judgment or a court of record. 
Section Ch.6.140 - Special Assessments. 
The city council may assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, streets, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances including lakes and ponds, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent thirty days after their due dates, and shall thereupon be collected as provided in Section 6.150 of this Charter. 
Section Ch.6.150 - Collection of Delinquent Taxes and Fees. 
The city council may provide by resolution or ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city by whatever means as are not precluded by law. This authority shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions; and providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
Section Ch.6.160 - Transfer of Executions. 
The clerk of the City of Roswell shall be authorized to transfer and assign any fi.fa. or execution issued for street, sewer, or any other assessment in the same manner, upon the same terms, and to the same effect, and thereby vest the purchaser or transferee with the same rights as in cases of sales or transfers of fi.fas., as now provided by law; and all sales of property hereafter made under execution in behalf of the city for the collection of street, sewer and other assessments, the owner or owners, as the case may be, are authorized to redeem same within the same time and in compliance with the same terms and payment of the same premium, interest and costs, as in cases of redemption of property where sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi.fa. as the same now exists or as may from time to time be provided by law. 
Section Ch.6.170 - Reserved. 
Section Ch.6.180 - Insurance. 
The city shall maintain sufficient casualty and liability insurance coverage on all property owned and/or operated by city personnel to adequately indemnify the city on claims of loss by insured or aggrieved parties. The amounts of insurance coverage shall be set from time to time by the city council in the form of a resolution as the need arises. 
Article Ch.7 - Municipal Court 

Section Ch.7.10 - Creation. 
There shall be a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Roswell. 
Section Ch.7.20 - Chief Judge and Associate Judges. 
(1)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge, who shall be elected as provided in subsection (3) of this section, and such associate judges, part-time, or stand-by judges as may be provided for by ordinance. The compensation of the chief judge and other judges shall be fixed by resolution. 
(2)  No person shall be eligible or qualified to serve as chief judge or associate judge of the municipal court unless he has attained the age of twenty-one (21) years, is a member of the State Bar of Georgia, is qualified to vote in the City of Roswell and Fulton County, and has resided in the City of Roswell at least one (1) year next preceding his election or selection. 
(3)  The chief judge of the municipal court shall be elected at the same election at which members of the city council from Posts One (1), Two (2), and Three (3) are elected. The candidate for chief judge who receives a majority of the votes cast in said election shall be elected to a term of office for four (4) years and until his successor is duly elected and qualified. In the event no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast in said election, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such a run-off shall be held as provided by Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. unless the date is postponed by court order. In the event no one qualifies as a candidate for the chief judge, the mayor and city council shall appoint a chief judge to serve until the next regular municipal election. The individual serving as judge of the municipal court at the time of adoption of this Charter, shall continue to serve until the expiration of the term of office to which he was elected and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Section Ch.7.30 - Oath. 
Before entering on the duties of his office, each judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state that he will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. This oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the meetings of the city council. 
Section Ch.7.40 - Removal. 
Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the city council or upon action taken by the State Judicial Qualifications Commission for: 
1)  Willful misconduct in office, 
2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties, 
3)  Habitual intemperance, 
4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute. 
5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
Section Ch.7.50 - Vacancy. 
(1)  A vacancy shall exist in the office of chief judge if the chief judge resigns, dies, moves his residence from the city, neglects to convene court as provided in Section 7.80 of this Charter, is adjudged legally incompetent, is removed from office as provided in Section 7.40, or is convicted of malfeasance in office or of a felony. 
(2)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of chief judge from any cause other than the expiration of a term of office, the vacancy shall be filled as provided in this paragraph. If the vacancy occurs within twelve (12) months of the expiration of the term, a chief judge shall be appointed by the city council to serve out the unexpired term of office. If the vacancy occurs at any other time, the vacancy shall be filled by a special election called for that purpose by the city council within a period of sixty (60) days after the office becomes vacant. At said election, a chief judge shall be elected to serve the remainder of the unexpired term and until his successor is elected and qualified. It shall be the duty of the city council to publish notice of the special election in the official organ of the city once a week for a two-week period immediately preceding said special election. 
Section Ch.7.60 - Stand-by Judges. 
(1)  Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, if the chief judge is for any reason temporarily unable to perform the duties of his office, or if during a limited period of time the workload of the court is such that a temporary additional judge is required, the chief judge may request a Superior Court judge, state court judge, a magistrate, or municipal court judge to sit and hold court during the municipal court judge's absence or during such period of time. 
(2)  The city council may at any time during an absence of the chief judge of the municipal court or during a limited period of time the workload of the court is such that a temporary additional judge is required, appoint a judge pro tempore who shall serve during such absence or period of time. 
Section Ch.7.70 - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. The court shall sit at a place designated by the city council. 
Section Ch.7.80 - Jurisdiction and Powers. 
(1)  The municipal court shall try and shall punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(2)  The municipal court shall have the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Roswell including but not limited to: 
(a)  The abatement of nuisances; 
(b)  The prosecution of traffic offenses as set forth in Title 40 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(c)  The prosecution of offenses relating to marijuana possession as set forth in Code Section 36-32-6 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(d)  The prosecution of offenses relating to operating a motor vehicle without effective insurance as set forth in Code Section 36-32-7 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(e)  The prosecution of offenses relating to operating a motor vehicle without a certificate of emission inspection as set forth in Code Section 36-32-8 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(f)  The prosecution of offenses relating to shoplifting as set forth in Code Section 36-32-9 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(g)  The prosecution of offenses relating to alcoholic beverages and persons under twenty-one (21) years of age as set forth in Code Section 36-32-10 of the O.C.G.A.; 
(h)  The same powers and authorities as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature; and 
(i)  Any additional power, authority, or jurisdiction granted to municipal courts pursuant to general laws of the state. 
(3)  The municipal court shall have the authority to hold courts of inquiry and to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(4)  The municipal court shall have the authority to hear applications for and issue arrest and search warrants for violations of state law. 
(5)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(6)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer and as authorized by this Charter or by general state law. All judges of the municipal court are authorized to issue search warrants and warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinances of the city. 
(7)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to the appropriate court for violations of state law. 
(8)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever a person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, then, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at the time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that personal or real property is accepted in lieu of a cash bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the city shall have a lien against such property for the value of the bond so forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as liens for delinquent taxes are enforced. 
(9)  The municipal court may fix as punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction a fine not exceeding the maximum allowed by state law or imprisonment for up to one hundred eighty (180) days, or both, or in lieu of imprisonment, it may sentence an offender, upon conviction, to community service for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days. The municipal court may punish those in its presence for contempt, provided such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten (10) days imprisonment, or both. In those cases where the municipal court has jurisdiction to try cases involving the violation of state law, the court may impose those penalties set forth for the violation of such law. 
Section Ch.7.90 - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Fulton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section Ch.7.100 - Court Personnel. 
The City shall be authorized to provide for such Court personnel as deemed appropriate for the effective operation of the Municipal Court of the City and the timely administration of justice. 
(Ordinance No. 2013-11-13 dated November 25, 2013) 
Sections Ch.7.110—Ch.7.140 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-11-13, § 1, adopted November 25, 2013, repealed § Ch.7.110, which pertained to clerk of court; § Ch.7.120, which pertained to solicitor and deputy solicitors; § Ch.7.130, which pertained to marshals; and § Ch.7.140, which pertained to other court personnel. The user's attention is directed to Section Ch.7.100 for similar provisions. 
Article Ch.8 - Severability 

Section Ch.8.10 - Act Declared to be Severable. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this Act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Article Ch.9 - Repealer 

Section Ch.9.10 - Generally. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of acts contained in the Charter thereto made by acts. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 1.1 - In General 

Section 1.1.1 - Code Designated and Cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, Georgia" and may be so cited. 
Section 1.1.2 - Rules of Construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
Council. The word "council" shall mean the mayor and each councilman of the city. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Fulton County, Georgia. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
City clerk. The term "city clerk" refers to that employee of the City of Roswell charged with keeping the minute book of the city. 
Governing body. Whenever the words "governing body" are used, they shall mean the mayor and council of the city, and/or board and commission members. 
Officials. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Roswell" were added thereto. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The term "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, shopping center, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Signature or subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
State Law reference— General definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1. 
Section 1.1.3 - General Penalty; Continuing Violation. 
(a)  This section shall apply whenever in this Code or in any secondary code adopted by reference any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful and no specific penalty is provided therefor in this Code or in the adopting ordinance. In such case, the violation, concealing of a violation, or the harboring, assisting or protecting of a person charged with or convicted of a violation of any such provision of this Code or any secondary code adopted by reference shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days and by community service for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days. Either or both such fine and imprisonment or community service shall be in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court or any officer trying the offender. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a), any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city, as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(c)  All fines and penalties for the violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance, or any order of the mayor and council shall, when recovered, inure to the use of the city and be paid into the city treasury unless otherwise directed by state or federal law. 
State Law reference— Municipal penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Section 1.1.4 - Reserved. 
Section 1.1.5 - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the City of Roswell, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3 hereof. 
Section 1.1.6 - Exercise of Powers. 
The powers of the city may be exercised by the city as provided in this Code, or by other agencies as provided by contract. 
Section 1.1.7 - References to Prior Codes. 
References in city forms, documents, citations and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be constructed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
Article 1.2 - Ordinances 

Section 1.2.1 - Catchlines of Sections. 
The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. Furthermore, the chapter, article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article or section hereof. 
Section 1.2.2 - Effect of Repeal of Ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinances repealed. 
Section 1.2.3 - Severability of Parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Section 1.2.4 - Amendment to Code; Effect of New Ordinances; Amendatory Language. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section of the Code of the City of Roswell is hereby amended to read as follows: 
_______(Set out new provisions in full)_______ 
"Section _______. It is the intention of the mayor and council, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Roswell, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Section 1.2.5 - Certain Ordinances not Affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(c)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(d)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(e)  Any right or franchise granted by the mayor and council to any person. 
(f)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(g)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(h)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(i)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(j)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes. 
(k)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(l)  Any ordinance relating to elections. 
All such ordinances or acts are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
Article 2.1 - In General 

Section 2.1.1 - Council Meeting Time, Dates, and Quorum. 
Council meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. Zoning and land use matters shall be scheduled for the second Monday meeting of each month, but such meeting shall not be limited to those items. Any fifth Monday in a month is designated an open forum at which citizens may be heard before mayor and council on matters of public concern. 
When the date of any regular meeting of the city council falls on a federal, state or city holiday, then the date of such meeting may be changed by the mayor and council for their convenience and that of the public provided that such change is advertised or posted as set forth herein. Any regular scheduled meeting of mayor and city council may be changed or cancelled at any time by the mayor and city council. Such change or cancellation shall, where possible, be made at a council meeting and/or notice of such change or cancellation shall be advertised in the official newspaper of the city at least one (1) time before the change or cancellation is made. In addition, notice of such change or cancellation shall be placed in a prominent place at the city hall. If the change or cancellation is the result of an emergency or other unforeseen circumstances, posting notice of such change at city hall shall suffice. 
All regularly scheduled meetings of the mayor and city council will be held at the city hall except in case of an emergency and in cases in which the mayor and city council decide that it is in the best interest of the city to hold a meeting at a location other than the city hall. In the event of a change in location of a regular meeting of the mayor and city council, the change will, if possible, be announced at a regular city council meeting and, if not possible, be advertised in the official newspaper of the city one (1) time before said meeting. Such change in location shall be posted at the entrances to city hall before the time of the meeting, and such notice shall state the time and location of the meeting. 
A quorum, as defined in Section Ch. 3.140 of the Roswell Charter, shall be present before business may be conducted at meetings of the mayor and city council. For time sensitive matters, as shall be determined by a majority vote of the mayor and council, the mayor and/or a city council member may be considered present for the purpose of establishing a quorum and voting if that person is present by telephone, video, or other electronic means of communication. The presiding officer shall attempt to contact all members of council not physically present at the meeting, including the mayor, in order to provide each member the opportunity to participate in said meeting. The mayor and/or councilmember participating by telephone, video or other electronic means of communication shall participate in the entire meeting in order that their vote shall be counted. The use of telephone, video, or other electronic means of communication shall not be permitted for participation in a meeting when a quorum of mayor and council are physically present or if the matter is not determined to be time sensitive. 
(2010-03-03, § 1, Amended, 03/01/2010; 2006-05-07, Amended, 05/01/2006; 2001-02-02, Amended, 02/19/2001; 2000-03-03, Amended, 3/20/2000) 
Section 2.1.2 - Clerk's Fee for Copies of Documents. 
Unless otherwise provided, the city clerk or her designee shall make a charge for all certified copies of ordinances and/or other public documents that include the official city seal. A charge will be added for each additional sheet. Any documents requested under the Georgia Open Records Act shall be made available by the clerk at a fee of $0.10 per page or the highest rate allowed by state law if such rate is higher, plus administrative charges as allowed by law. In the case of electronic records, the clerk may charge the actual cost of the media on which the records or data are produced and/or as provided by state law. 
( 2015-12-29 , § 1, Amended 12/14/2015; 2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 2.1.3 - Document Retention. 
Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq., the City of Roswell adopts the records management plan and record retention schedules recommended by the Georgia Secretary of State as amended from time to time by future resolutions of the mayor and council of the City of Roswell. The city clerk shall coordinate all records management for the city including storage, archiving, and destruction of records. Records shall be maintained according to approved retention schedules. All requests made under the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., excepting standardized routine requests of the Roswell Police Department, the Roswell Fire Department, and Roswell Municipal Court shall be made to the city clerk. No record shall be destroyed except as provided in the approved retention schedule; provided, however, a written record may be destroyed if it is otherwise preserved by means of microfiche, scanning or other reliable photographic or digital means. Changes to the retention schedules shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(2001-04-01, Amended, 04/01/2001) 
Section 2.1.4 - Compensation of Elected Officials. 
Each member of the city council shall receive compensation of $1,500.00 per month. The mayor of the city shall receive compensation of $3,333.33 per month. The compensation of the chief judge of the municipal court shall be set by resolution of the mayor and city council. Such compensation shall be considered salary for tax purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2014-08-09, § 1, 08/25/2014 ; 2001-08-01, 2001-08-02, Amended, 08/06/2001; 2008-06-05, Amended, 06/30/2008) 
Section 2.1.5 - Fees. 
Actual administrative costs of the city for certain services provided by the city shall be recouped by the city through user fees. The mayor and city council will establish such fees by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2003-12-31, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 2.1.6 - Rules of Decorum for All Roswell Meetings. 
The purpose of the Rules of Decorum is to foster an atmosphere of civil and courteous discourse, even (especially!) when discussing contentious topics, at all meetings held by the City of Roswell. 
(a)  General rules applicable to all (mayor and council, staff, citizens) . 
1.  Each speaker will direct his or her comments to the mayor and or presiding officer and not to any other individual present. 
2.  Each speaker will refrain from personal attacks, foul or abusive language, and will maintain a civil and courteous manner and tone. 
3.  Each speaker will speak only to the agenda item under consideration. 
4.  Members of the audience will respect the rights of others and will not create noise or other disturbances that will disrupt or disturb persons who are addressing the mayor and council or committee or board or commission, or members of those bodies who are speaking, or otherwise impede the orderly conduct of the meeting. 
(b)  Additional rules for members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions . 
1.  Members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions will conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner at all meetings. 
2.  Members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions will not speak until recognized by the mayor or presiding officer. 
3.  Remarks by members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions will be directed to the mayor or presiding officer and not to individuals, other council, committee, board or commission members, staff or citizens in attendance. Questions for staff or individuals or other council, committee, board or commission members will be directed to the mayor or presiding officer, who will then direct the appropriate person to answer. 
4.  Members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions always are free to criticize or question policies, positions, data or information presented. However, members of mayor and council, committees, boards or commissions will not attack or impugn the person presenting. 
(c)  Enforcement . The mayor or presiding officer has the authority to enforce each of the Rules of Decorum regarding members of the public. If any rule is violated, the mayor or presiding officer will give the speaker a warning, citing the rule being violated, and telling the speaker that a second violation will result in a forfeiture of the right to speak further. The mayor or presiding officer also may have the offending speaker removed from the meeting if the misconduct persists. The mayor or presiding officer shall not have any power under this provision regarding a council, committee, board or commission member. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04-02 , § 1, Added 4/9/2018) 
Article 2.2 - Personnel 

Section 2.2.1 - Classification of Employees. 
City employees, other than elected officers, shall be classified as follows: 
(a)  Regular: Hired full-time whether salary is hourly, weekly or some other pay rate; 
(b)  Temporary: Hired to fill a temporary need for a specified period of time; 
(c)  Part-time: Hired to work at irregular intervals on a short-term basis. 
Section 2.2.2 - Personnel Manual. 
The employment practices of the City of Roswell shall be set forth in a document known as the City of Roswell Personnel Manual. The manual shall be maintained by the director of human resources and updated on a regular basis to reflect changes in federal, state or local law. The director of human resources, the city attorney, the city administrator, or any member of the administration and Finance and Recreation and Parks Committee may initiate changes to the personnel manual. Substantive changes shall require the approval of mayor and council and shall be adopted by resolution. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 2.2.3 - Records and Reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
State Law reference— Local records to be open for personal inspection by citizenry, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
Section 2.2.4 - Authority to Contract for Benefits. 
It shall be the policy of the City of Roswell to attract and retain a qualified workforce through the provision of a comprehensive package of benefits. To that end, the city shall be authorized to contract with benefits providers for the purpose of providing insurance, retirement, pension plans and other benefits. Eligibility for benefits and the cost to employees shall be specified in the personnel manual. 
Section 2.2.5 - Job Descriptions. 
The city shall maintain a job specification for each of the positions authorized by this Code or otherwise authorized by city policy. Such specification shall describe the duties of the position, the qualifications necessary, licenses required, to whom such employee reports, expected salary range, and such other information as is necessary to effectively recruit for such position. Such specifications may be amended from time to time by the city administrator or mayor and council as the needs of the city warrant. 
Article 2.3 - City Administrator 

Section 2.3.1 - Creation of Office. 
The office of city administrator is hereby created. 
Section 2.3.2 - Appointment. 
The city administrator shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for an indefinite term to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The council shall choose him solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of the duties of his office as set forth in this article. Neither the mayor nor any councilman shall receive such appointment neither during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within one (1) year after the expiration of the term. 
Section 2.3.3 - Removal. 
The city council may remove the city administrator at any time by a majority vote of its members. The city council shall continue to pay his salary for a minimum of two (2) calendar months following removal, or as otherwise provided by contract except removal for cause or removal because of conviction of an offense involving moral turpitude. 
Section 2.3.4 - Powers and Duties Delegated to the City Administrator. 
The city administrator shall function as the administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of affairs of the city and may head one (1) or more city departments. To that end, he shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(a)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all employees of the city under his supervision except department heads and as otherwise provided hereinafter or by the City Charter or law. He may authorize the head of a department or office under his supervision to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in that department or office. 
(b)  Submit, whenever it is necessary to fill vacancies in department heads that are under the supervision of the city administrator, a recommendation of the qualified individual to fill the position for approval by mayor and council. The city administrator may recommend the removal or suspension of any such department head when it would be in the best interest of the city and the governing body shall give full weight to the city administrator's recommendations. All recommendations for appointment or removal shall be based solely on the merit, qualifications or disqualifications of the official concerned, without regard to his political beliefs or affiliations. 
(c)  Prepare the budget annually for submission by the mayor to the city council, together with a message describing the important features and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(d)  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
(e)  Keep the council advised of the financial conditions and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable. 
(f)  Recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for all employees in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates, and administer the city's personnel program. 
(g)  Recommend to the governing body from time to time adoption of such measures, as he may deem necessary and expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the community or for the improvement of administrative services. 
(h)  Consolidate or combine departments with the approval of the city council. 
(i)  Attend all meetings of the city council, and other official meetings, unless excused therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. He shall receive notice of all regular and special meetings of council and of any meetings of committees of the council. 
(j)  Supervise the purchase of all materials, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget and let contracts. 
(k)  Approve issuance of development impact fee credits. 
(l)  Assist the mayor and the council in seeing that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(m)  Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and, in regard to service maintained by the public utilities of the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(n)  Devote his entire time except as approved by the mayor and the council to the discharge of his official duties. 
(o)  Assign job priorities and work schedules as necessary within the administrative service in accordance with policy established by the mayor and the council, and otherwise direct the day-to-day work routine. 
(p)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the council, not inconsistent with the City Charter, law or ordinance. 
(q)  The city administrator has no authority to bind the city unless specifically authorized to do so. Such authorization includes the power to sign contracts in the absence of the mayor and mayor pro-tem where time is of the essence. 
(r)  The city administrator will not attend meetings as an official delegate of the city unless specifically authorized to do so by mayor or council. 
Section 2.3.5 - Responsibility for Routine Administrative Matters; Interference. 
It is the intent of the governing body that the city administrator be responsible for the day-to-day operations of city services under his supervision according to the policy determinations of the mayor and the council. To facilitate the desired high level of municipal service, members of the governing body shall not exert improper pressure upon the city administrator to hire or fire any specific person and such decisions shall be based entirely upon merit. 
Section 2.3.6 - Emergency Purchases and Contracts. 
In case of accident, disaster, or other circumstances creating a public emergency, the city administrator may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting said emergency; however, he shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. The mayor and/or the city attorney shall be consulted, if possible, before any such purchase is made. 
Section 2.3.7 - Bond. 
The city administrator shall upon request furnish a surety bond, to be approved by the council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. The amount of the bond shall be as set by the city council. 
Section 2.3.8 - Compensation. 
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time. 
Section 2.3.9 - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the office of city administrator shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the effective date of such vacancy, either by a permanent appointment or by an acting city administrator. 
Sections 2.3.10, 2.3.11 - Reserved. 
Section 2.3.12 - Assistant City Administrator—Generally. 
The position of assistant city administrator is hereby created. The assistant city administrator shall be directly responsible to and under the supervision of the city administrator. The assistant city administrator shall be the department head for the city's administrative functions. In addition, the assistant city administrator shall assist the city administrator in coordinating the operations and proper administration of the affairs of the city and in performing those duties set forth in section 2.3.5 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Section 2.3.13 - Same—Statement of Duties. 
(a)  Generally. The assistant city administrator shall function as the city administrator in the absence of the city administrator from the city and/or illness of the city administrator. In the event the city administrator dies, resigns from office, or is removed from office, the assistant city administrator will act as the city administrator until a city administrator is formally appointed and assumes the duties of the position. 
(b)  Examples of duties. The assistant city administrator shall be responsible for providing assistance to the city administrator in all phases of the city's operations. He/she: 
(1)  Conducts assigned studies and prepares reports recommending solutions; 
(2)  Assists in the development of the annual city budget and work plan; 
(3)  Formulates administrative policies and procedures; instructs supervisory personnel on new policies, or changes existing ones; 
(4)  Attends all meetings of administrative boards, legislative boards, judicial hearings and city council meetings as directed by the mayor and/or city administrator; 
(5)  Devotes his entire time, except by approval of the mayor and council and/or city administrator, to the discharge of his official duties; 
(6)  Performs such other duties as assigned by the city administrator. 
Section 2.3.14 - Same—Appointment. 
The assistant city administrator shall be recommended by the city administrator and appointed by a majority vote of the city council. The assistant city administrator will be appointed to an indefinite term to serve at the pleasure of the city council. He or she shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with specific reference to his or her actual experience in the duties of the appointment as set forth in section 2.3.13 above. 
Section 2.3.15 - Same—Bond. 
The assistant city administrator shall upon request furnish a surety bond, to be approved by the mayor and city council, said bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her duties. The mayor and city council shall set the amount of the bond. The bond premium will be paid for by the city. 
Section 2.3.16 - Same—Compensation. 
The assistant city administrator shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall fix from time to time by ordinance and/or resolution. 
Article 2.4 - Committees and Departments 

Section 2.4.1 - Committees—Creation. 
(a)  Policy development and monitoring of policy implementation for the city shall be through three (3) committees of council. Each committee shall be comprised of the mayor, two (2) councilmember liaisons and the city administrator. The mayor shall appoint councilmember liaisons for the following departments: 
Administration and Finance  Community Development  Public Safety  Public Works  Recreation and Parks  Transportation 
The city administrator shall not be a voting member of the committee, but shall prepare and present agenda items along with supporting documentation to the mayor and all members of council for the committee's action at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any and all committee meetings. No item may be added to the committee agenda subsequent to the forty-eight-hour timeframe without a majority vote of the voting members present at the committee meeting. Although not a voting member of the committee, the city administrator shall participate in discussions of the committee. Appropriate staff members shall attend and participate in meetings of the committees as determined by the city administrator. For purposes of this ordinance, the mayor and all councilmembers may attend, participate and vote on all committee matters. Committee meetings shall be held at least once a month as determined by such committee and no quorum shall be necessary to conduct business of the committee. Emergency/special called meetings of a committee may be called by the councilmember liaison for the department requiring such emergency meeting, provided the mayor and all councilmembers are notified of the subject matter and given all relevant information pertaining to such matter at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such meeting. The following committees are hereby created: 
(1)  The Community Development and Transportation Committee which shall meet each month at a time and location set by such committee and which shall address items involving community development and transportation. The mayor, city administrator and following councilmember liaisons shall be members of this committee: 
(a)  Community development. 
(b)  Transportation. 
(2)  The Public Safety and Public Works Committee which shall meet each month at a time and location set by such committee and which shall address items involving public works and public safety. The mayor, city administrator and following councilmember liaisons shall be members of this committee: 
(a)  Public works. 
(b)  Public safety. 
(3)  The Administration and Finance and Recreation and Parks Committee which shall meet each month at a time and location set by such committee and which shall address items involving recreation and parks and administration and finance. The mayor, city administrator and following councilmember liaisons shall be members of this committee: 
(a)  Recreation and parks. 
(b)  Administration and finance. 
(b)  Each committee as described heretofore shall adopt such procedures and rules as it deems necessary for the efficient and orderly conduct of business, provided votes of the committee shall only be authorized for adoption of rules and procedures of the committee, including the setting of such meetings; for placement of items on a council agenda; to direct the city administrator as to policy development and/or monitoring; and for other reasons described in the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances as such ordinances pertain to committee actions. This ordinance shall not prohibit individual councilmembers, the mayor, the city administrator or the city attorney from placing items on the agenda of mayor and council. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007; 2003-06-12, Amended, 06/02/2003; 2003-03-03, Amended, 03/17/2003; Manual, Amended, 08/23/1999, Ordinance to define a quorum for purposes of the Open Meetings Act.) 
Section 2.4.2 - City Departments. 
The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Finance. 
(3)  Community development. 
(4)  Transportation. 
(5)  Public works. 
(6)  Police. 
(7)  Fire. 
(8)  Parks and recreation. 
Each department shall be managed by a department head with the power and authority to act as described in this article or in that chapter of the Code specifically related to their function. Department heads shall work under the limited direction of the city administrator and shall be appointed by mayor and council. Each department head shall be responsible for overseeing the day-to-day operations of their department and shall make decisions and recommendations regarding personnel and budget matters. 
Section 2.4.3 - Director of Administration. 
The assistant city administrator shall serve as the director of the administration department and shall provide technical leadership in city administration, personnel, building maintenance, court services operations, historic and cultural affairs and support services activities in addition to those duties and responsibilities enumerated in section 2.3.13. 
(2001-11-03, Amended, 11/19/2001) 
Section 2.4.4 - Finance Director. 
The finance director is responsible for managing, planning, directing, and maintaining the city's financial operations. Day-to-day work involves directing and supervising the work of personnel involved in performing the accounting, utility billing, property tax, payroll, and purchasing functions for the City of Roswell. The major duties and responsibilities of this position include but are not limited to providing technical leadership in budgeting, overseeing and directing investment opportunities and debt administration, as well as insuring proper record retention policies are strictly followed. The finance director may also serve as the city treasurer. 
Section 2.4.5 - Director of Community Development. 
The director of community development oversees the operations of the city's comprehensive community development and planning activities. Work involves insuring compliance with development regulations and zoning ordinances, interpreting rules and regulations governing departmental operations, and directing all planning, zoning, engineering and inspections, code enforcement, and economic development. The major duties and responsibilities include but are not limited to the following: 
•  Reviews, analyzes and interprets data related to comprehensive planning matters; directs the development of comprehensive land use plans in compliance with overall goals and objectives of the city; interprets, adopts and ensures compliance of the comprehensive plan and community development work with applicable laws and ordinances. 
•  Reviews, analyzes and interprets data related to development activities; administers and enforces all development rules and ordinances; reviews applications, plats and site plans for compliance with applicable codes; negotiates issues and resolves problems with citizens, developers, builders, contractors, government officials; directs and monitors on-site inspections on an as needed basis. 
•  Provides guidance and technical assistance on economic development, planning, zoning, land development, inspections and interpretation/application of applicable codes and ordinances to subordinates, city employees, city officials, appointed boards, property owners, contractors, developers and the general public. 
•  Shall serve as zoning director unless someone else is appointed by mayor and council. 
(2001-11-03, Amended, 11/19/2001) 
Section 2.4.6 - Zoning Director. 
There is hereby created the position of zoning director who shall assist the director of community development and assume authority for planning, zoning, development permitting, engineering, code enforcement and business licensing activities in the City of Roswell. The zoning director shall perform all duties of the office described in the city's personnel manual and those set forth in the Unified Development Code (UDC) of the City of Roswell. In particular the zoning director shall serve as liaison to each of the city's boards and commissions and shall make recommendations on behalf of staff in Rezoning applications and review of preliminary plats. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014) 
Section 2.4.7 - Director of Transportation. 
The director of transportation is responsible for planning, prioritizing and managing department operations in the areas of street construction and maintenance, traffic management and control, roadway design, community development, transportation and urban planning. The work requires the development of strategies and programs to improve traffic operations and flow in the city while protecting the integrity of neighborhoods and historic areas. Duties also include serving as liaison to regional, state and federal governmental agencies, the business and civic community, and the general public. 
Section 2.4.8 - Director of Public Works. 
The director of public works directs and supervises the work of personnel involved in the areas of sanitation, fleet maintenance, water treatment, water distribution, and environmental programs. The director oversees compliance with state and federal regulations, and initiates programs designed to protect the city's stormwater detention and stormwater management systems. This position is also charged with insuring that city services are provided responsibly. 
Section 2.4.9 - Director of Recreation and Parks. 
The primary responsibility in this position is for the support of the recreation commission's policy, and in directing and implementing the master plan for a dynamic city recreation and parks complex. The director manages and disburses the recreation activity fund and oversees the efficient operation and maintenance of all the City of Roswell's parks and recreation facilities. 
Article 2.5 - Code of Ethics 

Section 2.5.1 - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the City of Roswell that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
Section 2.5.2 - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, the term: 
Closure means meetings of council or the committees expressly exempted from the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3, as amended from time to time by the Georgia General Assembly. 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro-tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six (6) months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
(2007-03-06, Amended, (a) added, 03/19/2007) 
Section 2.5.3 - Prohibitions. 
No member of the governing authority shall: 
(a)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(b)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(c)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(d)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(e)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(f)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(g)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
(2)  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
(3)  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
(4)  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(h)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(i)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest; 
(j)  Disclose or otherwise disseminate information, deliberations or other matters conducted in closure unless expressly required to be made open to the public by the Georgia Open Meetings Act; 
Prohibition (b) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
Prohibition (e) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2.5.4 are made to the board or commission chairperson thirty (30) days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(2007-03-06, Amended, (j) added, 03/19/2007) 
State Law reference— Voting when personally interested, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-6. 
Section 2.5.4 - Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement thirty (30) days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest. 
Section 2.5.5 - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
Section 2.5.6 - Prohibited Contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(a)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(b)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(c)  Contracts entered into in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
(d)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(e)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. 
Section 2.5.7 - Restrictions on Contracts with Former Members of the Governing Authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding twelve-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
Section 2.5.8 - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three (3) members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
Section 2.5.9 - Board of Ethics. 
(a)  Composition of the board of ethics: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five (5) residents of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers shall each designate two (2) qualified citizens to provide a pool of fourteen (14) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two (2) years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city administrator shall maintain a listing of these fourteen (14) qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five (5) members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within sixty (60) days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six (6) months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this ordinance and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this ordinance; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this ordinance; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; and 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
Section 2.5.10 - Service of Complaint; Hearings and Disposition of Complaints. 
The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five (5) days after completion of the hearing. 
Section 2.5.11 - Penalty and Member Rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this ordinance shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
Section 2.5.12 - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Fulton County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
Article 2.6 - Boards and Commissions 

Section 2.6.1 - Scope. 
There is created a board of zoning appeals, a design review board, a historic preservation commission, a planning commission, and a construction board of adjustment and appeals which shall have the powers and duties and be subject to and governed by the regulations set forth in this article and the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
Section 2.6.2 - Composition. 
Each of the foregoing boards and commissions shall have seven (7) members. Each shall elect by majority vote a chairman from among its members, who shall serve for one (1) year or until a successor is elected. 
The design review board membership shall include, unless otherwise approved by mayor and council, individuals with the following qualifications in addition to any listed in this article: 
(a)  At least one (1) member shall be an architect with a current state registration; 
(b)  At least one (1) member shall be a registered landscape architect; 
(c)  At least one (1) member shall be a commercial building contractor. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, such board shall have two (2) alternates, one (1) member at large from the building industry and one (1) from the public at large. 
The zoning director shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the planning commission, the design review board, the historic preservation commission and the board of zoning appeals. The chief building inspector shall serve as the secretary of the construction board. 
(2001-04-02, Amended, 04/09/2001) 
Section 2.6.3 - Terms of Office. 
Board and commission members shall serve three-year terms. A member of any board or commission shall not serve more than three (3) full consecutive terms on any board or commission after adoption of this ordinance, but may at the election of mayor and council be appointed to serve on another board or commission. If members are currently serving an unexpired term, said term shall not be considered an initial term for purposes of these term limits. A position on a board or commission currently being occupied by a holdover member shall either be filled by reappointment, with such reappointment being deemed an initial term for purposes of term limits, be filled by a newly appointed member or be deemed vacant six (6) months after adoption of this ordinance. A member whose term expires after adoption of this ordinance may serve until his/her successor has been duly appointed or for a maximum period of six (6) months whichever is shorter. For any board or commission created subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance, three-year terms shall be staggered with initial appointments as follows: three (3) members for a term of three (3) years and four (4) members for a term of two (2) years. 
(2010-02-01, Amended, 02/01/2010; 2003-04-06, Amended, 04/14/2003) 
Section 2.6.3.1 - Staggering Terms. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2.6.3, if the terms of a majority of the members of any board or commission expire in the same month, then mayor and council may extend the term of any board member by one (1) or two (2) years to create staggered terms, thereby allowing for greater continuity of experience on the board or commission involved. This section 2.6.3.1 shall automatically be repealed at close of business on December 31, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07-07, § 1, Added, 7/8/2013) 
Section 2.6.4 - Protocol for Appointments. 
The city clerk shall advise the mayor and council of impending appointments or vacancies at least thirty (30) days in advance. A slate of nominations shall be compiled based on recommendations from the mayor, council, and the board or commission affected. The mayor shall request closure, in accordance with the Open Meetings Law, prior to nomination. 
(2002-05-01, Amended, 05/20/2002) 
Section 2.6.5 - Appointments. 
Appointments shall be made by nomination of the mayor with the approval of city council. 
Section 2.6.6 - Residence Requirements. 
All members shall be residents of the city. However, if a serving member moves outside the city limits, such member may serve until his/her successor has been duly appointed, or for a maximum period of six (6) months whichever is shorter. 
(2010-02-01, § 2, Amended, 02/01/2010; 2003-04-06, Amended, 04/14/2003) 
Section 2.6.7 - Unexcused Absences. 
The minimum attendance requirement shall be two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the regularly scheduled meetings. Failure to adhere to minimum attendance requirements during any twelve-month period shall cause such member's position to be declared vacant. 
Section 2.6.8 - Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the same manner that original appointments are made. 
Section 2.6.9 - Members to Serve Without Pay. 
Members shall serve without pay. Members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in obtaining required training. Such required training shall be designated and approved by the mayor and council. 
Section 2.6.10 - Quorum. 
A quorum of four (4) members shall be required for consideration of any matter. Any action taken shall require the affirmative or negative vote of a majority of the members present and voting. 
Section 2.6.11 - Removal. 
Any member may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
Section 2.6.12 - Organization and Rules. 
(a)  Each of the boards and commission shall make its rules of procedure and determine its time of meetings. The date and time of each meeting as well as agenda items to be considered shall be publicized in the manner that meetings of mayor and council are. 
(b)  All meetings at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records maintained by the boards and commissions shall be public records unless expressly excepted by a provision of the Georgia Open Records Act. The bodies shall keep minutes of their formal proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question; and records of their examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the mayor and each member of the city council. The minutes of the meetings shall be a public record. 
(c)  Each board or commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures if any, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor. 
Sections 2.6.13—2.6.15 - Reserved. 
Section 2.6.16 - Appeal. 
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of a board or commission with the exception of the board of zoning appeals, may within thirty (30) days of the decision take an appeal to the Roswell City Council upon payment of a $100.00 fee per appealing party. For purposes of this section, an aggrieved party is one who demonstrates that his or her property will suffer special damage as a result of the decision complained of rather than merely some damage that is common to all property owners and citizens similarly situated. 
The Roswell City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and give at least fifteen (15) days' public notice thereof and due notice to the parties in interest. The council shall make a decision within thirty (30) days from the date of the hearing unless such time is extended with the approval of the appealing party. Decisions shall be made based on the record presented to the board and the substantial evidence standard shall apply. 
All appeal decisions of the city council shall be final, and shall, in all instances be subject to judicial review in the manner prescribed by law. 
Section 2.6.17 - Training and Education. 
(a)  Applicability. This section shall apply to members of the board of zoning appeals, design review board, historic preservation commission, planning commission, and construction board of adjustment and appeals, except as specifically made inapplicable by paragraph (b) of this Code section or unless waived pursuant to paragraph (h) of this Code section. 
(b)  Training and Education Required. As a condition of maintaining their appointments and as a condition of being reappointed, members of boards and commissions to which this section applies shall attend by the 365th day of their term of appointment one (1) or more courses, seminars, or other opportunities of training and education on matters pertaining to the operations, activities, or duties of their respective board or commission. The mayor shall have the authority to extend the timeframe by which this requirement must be satisfied. This provision shall not apply to a citizen appointed to a board or commission to fill an unexpired term of one (1) year or less. This provision shall not apply to any board or commission members currently serving on a board or commission, unless said board or commission members intends to seek and accept reappointment to the board or commission. 
(c)  Notice of Requirements to Appointees. The mayor shall advise any citizen appointed a board or commission to which this section applies that training and education are required as a condition of their appointment, per requirements of the Roswell City Code. 
(d)  Notice of Training Opportunities. It shall be the responsibility of the director of community development to periodically notify members of boards and commissions to which this section applies of appropriate education and training opportunities that will meet the requirements of this Code section. 
(e)  Education and Training Opportunities. For purposes of this section, education and training opportunities include but are not limited to any organized training or educational activities that, in the opinion of the community development director, are relevant to the activities, operations, and duties of said board or commission. The following organizations and institutions among others are determined to be appropriate: 
Training programs and seminars by the University of Georgia, the Georgia Institute of Technology graduate city and regional planning program, Georgia State University, or any other institution of higher learning in the state. 
1.  Training programs by the Atlanta Regional Commission. 
2.  Conferences of the Georgia Association of Zoning Administrators. 
3.  Conferences of the Georgia Chapter of the American Planning Association or the American Planning Association. 
4.  For members of the historic preservation commission, conferences and seminars of the National Trust for Historic Preservation or its state chapter. 
5.  For members of the design review board, any conference or seminar sponsored by the American Institute of Architects, the American Society of Landscape Architects, or their respective state chapters, or any such similar organization devoted to educating officials in architecture, landscape architecture, and the built environment. 
6.  For members of the construction board of adjustment and appeals, any conference or seminar sponsored by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., or any such similar professional organization in the building construction industry. 
7.  Any business or other entity offering appropriate training and educational opportunities appropriate to board and commission members. 
8.  Training programs organized by the community development director specifically for a board or commission, or boards and commissions and their members. 
(f)  Costs to be Borne by the City. All expenses incurred related to a course of training and education authorized and required by this Code section, including the reasonable costs of housing, travel, and meals, shall be paid from public funds appropriated for such purposes; provided, however, that the city administrator may agree to pay a portion only of required registration fees and travel costs for education and training opportunities provided outside the State of Georgia. 
(g)  Requirement not a Budget Obligation. The community development director shall estimate the costs of training and educating board and commission members to which this section applies and propose funds for education and training of board and commission members in the department's annual budget. This Code section shall not, however, be considered an obligation of the mayor and city council to provide any set amount of annual operating budget funds for such education and training opportunities for board and commission members. 
(h)  Waiver. The city administrator may waive the mandatory education and training requirements of this section for any member or members of boards or commissions in the event that annual operating budget funds are not available for training and education. The community development director may waive the mandatory education and training requirements of this section where, in his or her opinion, training and education opportunities appropriate to a particular board or commission have not been offered within the state within the given time period of a board or commission member's term of appointment. 
(i)  Report. Upon request of the city administrator, the community development director shall report on compliance of each individual board and commission member to which this section applies with the training or educational requirements established by this Code section. 
(2002-07-04, Added, 07/08/2002) 
Article 2.7 - Purchasing 

Section 2.7.1 - Short Title. 
This article may be cited as "The City of Roswell Purchasing and Surplus Goods Disposal Ordinance." 
( 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.2 - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
City council means the governing board of the city. 
City administrator means the city administrator of the city. 
City finance director means the chief financial officer of the city. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. Does not include the routine operation, repair and/or maintenance of existing structures, building or real property. 
Contract means any city agreement, regardless of form or title, for the procurement or disposition of goods, commodities and services. Contracts also include change orders, modifications, amendments, supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing. Every contract must be duly authorized and approved prior to execution. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wage from the city whether on a full-time or part-time basis. The term shall encompass all members of the governing authority without regard to whether or not such individual is compensated. 
Gifts or favors means any thing or any service of value. 
Goods or commodities means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment, and other forms of tangible personal property used by a city department in the accomplishment of its responsibilities. 
Local vendor means a vendor which operates and maintains a brick and mortar business within the corporate limits of the City of Roswell; has a current occupation tax certificate; has paid in full all real and personal taxes owed the city; and which upon application has been certified as a "local vendor" prior to bid due date and time. 
Local vendor preference applies to all informal and formal procurements excluding construction projects; professional and consulting services; federally funded projects; and online/electronic sealed bid/reverse auctions. A local vendor's bid will be awarded if the bid is within two (2) percent of the non-local vendor's bid who otherwise would have received the award of the contract. 
Ordinance means this article. 
Professional services means accounting, architectural, legal, medical and other such services provided by a formally certified member of a professional body. 
Purchase order means the document authorizing a seller to deliver goods and services with payment to be made later. 
Purchasing agent means the principal purchasing official of the city pursuant to section 2.7.3 of this ordinance. 
Sustainability means reducing the amount of resources used as well as reducing the amount of waste and emissions produced in order to limit the environmental impact or ecological footprint. The city will improve sustainability efforts through an environmentally preferred purchasing program that provides for the present generation and needs of the organization while honoring our past and allowing for the needs of future generations. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ; 2009-06-05, § 1, Amended, 06/01/2009; 2007-01-01, Amended, (j) and (k) added, 01/03/2007) 
Section 2.7.3 - Purchasing Agent. 
The city administrator shall have the responsibilities and powers of the purchasing agent under this ordinance; provided, however, the city administrator may delegate some or all of the responsibilities and powers to a subordinate city employee and may designate the employee as the purchasing manager. If the city administrator reserves any power or responsibility for him or herself, that reservation shall be expressed in written delegation statement filed with the city clerk. The person designated purchasing manager, other than the city administrator, shall report directly to the city finance director or designee. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ; 2005-02-01, Amended, 02/07/2005) 
Section 2.7.4 - Powers and Duties of the Purchasing Manager. 
The purchasing manager shall have the following powers and duties when delegated by the city administrator: 
(a)  Procure or oversee the procurement of all goods and services needed by the city with full consideration of sustainable and environmentally preferred products and advertise for bids for such goods and services as required by section 2.7.12. Consistent with this ordinance and subject to the approval of the city administrator and city finance director, the purchasing manager may adopt operating procedures related to the purchase of goods and services for the city and may publish a handbook or manual containing those procedures. 
(b)  Provide for and oversee the development of specifications for goods and services purchased by the city, administer purchase contracts to which the city is a party, and provide for inspecting and accepting or rejecting of goods and services purchased by the city. 
(c)  Process or oversee the processing of all claims for loss, damage, breakage, or shortage, and claims for refund and adjustment concerning the purchase of goods or services for the city. 
(d)  Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories of goods belonging to the city, and provide for the transfer between city departments of surplus goods. 
(e)  Require bonds, insurance and other forms of protection for the city on the process of procuring goods and services for the city. 
(f)  Terminate solicitations for bids for any good(s) or service(s) when in the opinion of the purchasing manager, it is in the city's best interest to do so. 
(g)  Reject any and all bids, when in the opinion of the purchasing manager, it is in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(h)  Following consultation with the city attorney, terminates contracts or pursues other remedies when the party or parties with whom the city is contracting has or have breached the contract. 
(i)  Sell or oversee the sale of goods or property of the city as prescribed in division III of this ordinance. 
(j)  Perform such other duties, as the city administrator and city finance director shall direct. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ; 2009-06-05, § 2, Amended, 06/01/2009) 
Section 2.7.5 - Pre-Audit Certification. 
The purchasing manager shall not approve any contract for goods or services until the city director of finance certifies, after pre-audit, that there is to the credit of the using department, a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such contact. Subject to the approval of the city administrator and city finance director, the purchasing manager may issue operating rules to ensure compliance with this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.6 - Ethics in Purchasing. 
Each person involved in the procurement process must adhere to a high standard of ethics. Each person will be bound by the city's Code of Ethics as adopted in the City of Roswell's Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.7 - Evasion Prohibited. 
No purchase or sale shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.8 - Promoting Sustainability. 
The City of Roswell (city) is a significant consumer of goods and services. The city desires to encourage the procurement of sustainable and environmentally preferred products and services. The City of Roswell Mayor and Council have resolved that the city will take an active role to promote the analysis of life cycle costs for products and services to encourage protection of the environment by showing preference for the procurement of sustainable products and services for the use in city operations. 
(a)  In general, environmentally preferable products and services are those that would reduce negative effects on human health and environment when compared with the competing products and services. More specifically, this comparison would include consideration of all phases of the product's life cycle, including raw materials acquisition, production, manufacturing, packaging, distribution, operation, maintenance and disposal, including potential for reuse or ability to be recycled. 
(b)  In practice, the objective is to purchase products that have been environmentally certified or eco-labeled because they have reduced environmental impact due to the way they are made, used, transported, stored, packaged and disposed. It means looking for products that do not harm human health, are less polluting and that minimize waste, maximize use of bio-based or recycled materials, conserve energy and water, and reduce the consumption of and disposal of hazardous materials. 
(c)  Therefore, the City of Roswell will implement an environmentally preferable purchasing program that accounts for life cycle costs and gives preference to products that are recycled, recyclable and otherwise more environmentally friendly than traditional products; purchase Energy Star rated equipment and appliances when possible to do so and, purchase recycled copy, computer, and fax paper with at least thirty (30) percent recycled content whenever the use of the paper makes it possible to do so. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ; 2009-06-05, § 3, Added, 06/01/2009) 
Section 2.7.9 - Reserved. 
Section 2.7.10 - Small Purchases. 
The purchasing manager shall establish procedures for purchases of goods and services involving the estimated expenditure of $25,000.00 or less. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.11 - Purchases Based on Informal Procurement. 
All contracts for the purchase of goods and services involving the estimated expenditure of $25,000.00 or more of public money, but less than $75,000.00 shall be made after informal bids are secured. No less than three (3) businesses, when possible, shall be solicited to submit informal bids. The purchasing manager shall keep a record of all bids submitted and the record shall be available for public inspection after the contract is awarded, in the manner provided by law. The purchasing manager shall develop written procedures for implementing the provisions of this section, which shall be subject to the approval of the city administrator and city finance director. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.12 - Purchases Based on Formal Procurement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, 
1.  No contract for professional services involving the estimated expenditure of $25,000.000 or more of public money shall be awarded unless the provisions of this section are followed; or 
2.  No contract for the purchase of goods and/or non-professional services involving the estimated expenditure of $75,000.00 or more of public money shall be awarded unless the provisions of this section are followed. 
The purchasing manager, subject to the approval of the city administrator and city finance director, shall make the determination of the method of procurement. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.13 - Competitive Sealed Bids. 
The city shall use the competitive sealed bid method of procurement whenever possible. Generally, the following conditions must be present: clear and adequate specifications, three or more responsible firms capable of submitting a bid. If these conditions are met, the procedure set forth herein shall be adhered to. The city administrator and city finance director must approve any deviation in writing. 
(a)  Public notice shall be given as required by Georgia law, but in no event less than fourteen (14) days. Any other methods of advertisement identified as likely to result in additional competition may be used in addition to required advertisement, at the discretion of the city administrator or finance director. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained and the time and place for opening of bids. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the bids and to make award that is in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  The purchasing manager may require that bid deposits be submitted with each bid. If bid deposits are required, they shall be in an amount equal to five (5) percent of the amount of the bid and may be submitted in the form of a bid bond signed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, cashier's check, certified check issued by a bank or trust company insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any other form of bid security deemed sufficient by the city attorney or his/her designee. The bid deposit requirement, including the form in which the bid security may be submitted, shall be included in the specifications. 
(c)  Bids shall be sealed. All bids shall be publicly opened and the purchasing manager shall make or oversee the making of a record of the bids received. The record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection after the bid opening in the manner prescribed by law. 
(d)  Award of bid shall be made to the bidder that submits the lowest responsible and responsive bid that meets the specifications contained in the bid documents unless and except such award may be made to a "local vendor" as defined in section 2.7.2 of this article and when such award is in the best interest of the city under "local vendor preference" stipulations as defined in section 2.7.2. The city reserves the right to make award if a single bid is received. The city reserves the right to split awards if it is in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(e)  The purchasing manager may require the successful bidder to furnish a payment and/or performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The payment and/or performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bond(s) shall be included in the specifications. 
(f)  All contracts of $25,000.00 or more, for professional services, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(g)  All contracts of $75,000.00 or more, for goods and non-professional services excluding commodity purchases, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(h)  Commodity purchases shall be awarded through the purchase order process and shall require approval of the city administrator, city finance director and purchasing manager. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.14 - Competitive Sealed Proposals. 
When use of the competitive sealed bid is either not practical or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposal. Use of the proposal is dependent upon such factors as: 
(a)  When the quality, availability or capability is overriding in relation to price in procurement of technical supplies or services; 
(b)  When the initial installation needs to be evaluated together with subsequent maintenance and service capabilities and what priorities should be given these requirements in the city's best interest; 
(c)  If a fixed price or cost type contract is more advantageous; or 
(d)  Whether the market place will respond better to a solicitation permitting not only a range of alternative proposals, but evaluation and discussion of them before making the award. 
The procedural steps for competitive sealed proposals shall be as follows: 
(a)  Public notice shall be given as required by Georgia law, but in no event less than fourteen (14) days. Any other methods of advertisement identified as likely to result in additional competition may be used in addition to required advertisement, at the discretion of the city administrator or finance director. The advertisement shall state the time and place where specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for deadline for receipt of proposals. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the proposals. 
(b)  Proposals shall be sealed. All proposals shall be received in public and the purchasing manager shall make or oversee the making of a record of the proposals received. The name of each proposer shall be announced but no other information shall be disclosed nor shall the proposals be considered an "open record" until a contract is awarded. The record of the proposals received shall be subject to public inspection after the deadline for receipt in the manner prescribed by law. 
(c)  Award of contract shall be made to the proposer that submits the proposal deemed in the best interest of the city taking into account the evaluation factors outlined in the proposal documents. A team consisting of no less than three (3) persons shall evaluate and order rank proposals. This team shall include the purchasing manager, the head of the user department and an additional representative of the user department selected by the respective department head. 
(d)  The purchasing manager may require the successful proposer to furnish a performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bond shall be included in the specifications. The city council may reject the bond of any proposer if they find it to be unacceptable. 
(e)  All contracts of $25,000.00 or more, for professional services, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(f)  All contracts of more than $75,000.00 for goods and non-professional services excluding commodity purchases, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all proposals. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.15 - Multi-Step Competitive Sealed Procurement. 
The multi-step competitive sealed procurement method may be used when the city desires to award a contract not necessarily based on price, and when specifications may not be readily available or when technical qualifications are essential for the decision making process. This type shall take the form of requests for proposals (RFP) or request for information (RFI) and shall follow the following format. If time is of the essence, the two (2) steps can be combined with the priced offer submitted in a separate sealed envelope at the time of submission of the technical offer. The pricing data is to remain unopened until evaluation of technical offers is complete. 
(a)  Public notice shall be given as required by Georgia law, but in no event less than fourteen (14) days. Any other methods of advertisement identified as likely to result in additional competition may be used in addition to required advertisement, at the discretion of the city administrator or finance director. The advertisement shall state the time and place where documents may be obtained, and the time and place for deadline for receipt of documents. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all documents received. 
(b)  The initial step shall consist of solicitation of technical offers with no costs or prices included. Evaluation criteria shall be included in the solicitation documents. A team consisting of no less than three (3) persons shall evaluate and order rank the results of this solicitation. This team shall include the purchasing manager, the head of the user department and an additional representative of the user department selected by the respective department head. Evaluation shall follow the same criteria as under request for proposals. 
(c)  In the second step, those who submitted technical offers deemed responsible and responsive in the initial step are then asked to submit price bids. 
(d)  Bids shall be sealed. All bids shall be publicly opened and the purchasing manager shall make or oversee the making of a record of the bids received. The record and the bids received shall be subject to public inspection after the bid opening in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  Award of bid shall be made to the bidder that submits the lowest responsible and responsive bid that meets the specifications contained in the bid documents and is in the best interest of the city. The city reserves the right to make award if a single bid is received. 
(f)  The purchasing manager may require the successful bidder to furnish a payment and/or performance bond to secure the faithful performance of all of the terms of the contract. The payment and/or performance bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and the form of the bond(s) shall be included in the specifications. 
(g)  All contracts of $25,000.00 or more, for professional services, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
(h)  All contracts of $75,000.00 or more, for goods and non-professional services excluding commodity purchases, to which this section applies shall be in writing and shall be approved by the city council. The city council may reject any and all bids. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.16 - Construction Acquisition. 
Construction acquisition shall follow the procedures for formal procurement in accordance with section 2.7.12, with competitive sealed bids in section 2.7.13 being the preferred method of procurement. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.17 - Acquisition of Certain Professional Services. 
(a)  This section may be used for the procurement of services within the scope of architecture, registered interior design, professional engineering, land surveying, or landscape architecture. 
(b)  When services exceed $25,000.00 or project costs exceed $1,000,000.00 statements of qualifications and performance data may be requested by public notice as required by Georgia law, but in no event less than fourteen (14) days. Any other methods of advertisement identified as likely to result in additional competition may be used in addition to required advertisement, at the discretion of the city administrator of finance director. The advertisement shall state a general description of the proposed project, the time and place for deadline for receipt of qualifications and performance data. The advertisement shall state that the city reserves the right to reject any or all of the qualifications received. 
(c)  A selection committee consisting of no less than three (3) persons shall evaluate the results of this solicitation. This team shall include the purchasing manager, the head of the user department and an additional representative as determined by the city administrator. The selection committee will conduct discussions with no less than three (3) firms regarding the proposed contract and the relative utility of alternate methods of approach for furnishing the required services. Selection shall be made in order of preference by the selection criteria. Evaluation shall be made primarily on the basis of competence and qualifications. Cost may be a factor in the determination of the firm to be selected. 
(d)  The purchasing manager or designee shall be authorized to enter into negotiations with the firm considered to be the most qualified in order to determine compensation that is deemed fair and reasonable to the city. If no agreement can be reached with the firm selected to be most qualified, negotiations shall be ended with that firm. 
(e)  The purchasing manager shall then enter into negotiations with the firm selected as the second most qualified firm. If no agreement is reached, the purchasing manager shall terminate negotiations and proceed with negotiations with the third firm in order of ranking by the selection committee. If no agreement is reached, the selection committee shall select additional firms in accordance with this section and negotiations shall continue until an agreement is reached that is determined to be fair and reasonable to the city. 
(f)  If fees are expected to fall under $25,000.00 the services may be procured in accordance with section 2.7.10 "Small Purchases." 
(g)  Section 2.7.18—Waiver Based on Other Government Purchases. 
When the city administrator and city finance director determine it to be in the best interest of the city to do so, the requirements of the ordinance may be waived for the purchase of goods and/or services from any person or entity that has, within the previous twelve (12) months, after having completed a public, formal bid process or contracted to furnish the same type of goods to: 
(a)  The United States of America or any federal agency; 
(b)  The State of Georgia or any agency or political subdivision of the state; or, 
(c)  Any other state or any agency or political subdivision of that state. 
If the person or entity is willing to furnish the goods at the same or more favorable price, terms, and conditions as those provided under the contract with the other unit or agency and provided the bid procedures are the same or more stringent than those of the city. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.18 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of section 2.7.10 to section 2.7.16 of this ordinance do not apply to the purchase of goods or services when: 
(a)  A good is available from only one (1) source or supply, or when standardization or compatibility is the overriding consideration; 
(b)  The purchase is pursuant to a contract with (a) the United States of America or an agency thereof or (b) any government unit or agency thereof within the United States for the purchase, lease, or other acquisition of goods; 
(c)  The purchase is regulated by other Federal and State laws, i.e., O.C.G.A § 36-91-1; 
(d)  A special emergency exists involving the health and safety of the people or their property; or 
(e)  The purchase is for: 
(1)  Land, artistic work, or other goods whose inherent nature is unique and cannot be competitively compared to other goods within its class. 
(2)  Printed copyright material including published books, maps, periodicals and technical pamphlets (not including software for computer systems), except where a greater savings can be realized by a quantity purchase. 
(3)  Real property, real estate brokerage and appraising, abstract of titles for real property, title insurance for real property and other related costs of acquisition of real property. 
(4)  Subscriptions, dues, and memberships and board member fees established during the budget process. 
(5)  Services provided directly to individual citizens and employees including reimbursements and other miscellaneous payments. 
(6)  Utilities, including but not limited to electricity and telephone service. 
(7)  Employee benefits and health related services procured through a quotation and negotiating process conducted by an expert in the field, or to maintain continuity of employee-health records. 
(8)  Travel, conferences, training, speakers, instructors, facilitators, and meeting expenses, or other expenditures covered by another city policy. 
(9)  Items for resale that require a particular manufacturer to enhance their marketability. 
(10)  Legal advertisements. 
(11)  Legal services, litigation, and legal expenses. 
(12)  Goods or services required for confidential and secure investigations, apprehensions and detentions of individuals suspected of or convicted of criminal offenses by law enforcement personnel. 
(13)  Seized property included in a court order authorizing disposal. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.19 - Goods Declared Surplus. 
When goods of the city are no longer necessary or useful to the city, the city administrator and city finance director may declare such goods to be surplus and authorize the purchasing manager to dispose of the goods in the manner prescribed in this division. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.20 - Disposal Procedures. 
The purchasing manager shall issue operating procedures for disposing of surplus. The procedures shall be subject to the approval of the city administrator and shall be designed to obtain, for the city, fair market value for the property disposed of and to accomplish the disposal in an efficient and economical manner. The procedures may provide for disposition by private sale or exchange, or by auction, or by using the goods as trade-in, credit, or part payment on the purchase of other goods, or by any other manner of disposition that meets the purpose and intent of this section. 
For surplus valued at $5,000.00 or more, the purchasing manager may dispose of the surplus by any of the following methods: 
(a)  Advertisement for Sealed Bids. The procedure specified in section 2.7.12 of this ordinance for the purchase of goods by sealed bid shall be used, except that the sale shall be made to the highest bidder. 
(b)  Public Auction. A notice of the auction shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than sixty (60) days prior to the date of the auction. The notice shall identify the goods to be sold and set out the date, time, place, and terms of the sale, as determined by the purchasing manager. 
(c)  Exchange. The purchasing manager may exchange surplus goods belonging to the city for other goods by private negotiation if the city receives full and fair consideration in exchange for its surplus goods. An exchange under this subsection requires prior approval by the city council. 
(d)  Other. The city council may authorize the disposition of goods by any other lawful means when, because of the unusual character of the goods to be disposed of or unusual circumstances affecting the disposition of the goods, it appears to the city council to be in the city's best interest to do so. 
The purchasing manager shall maintain a record that describes generally the goods disposed of, to whom the goods were conveyed, and the consideration received for the goods. The city administrator shall make periodic reports to the city council concerning disposition of goods made pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.21 - Modification in Excess of $75,000.00. 
Every contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment in excess of $75,000.00 shall be subject to prior approval by the mayor and council. No contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.22 - Modification Less Than $75,000.00. 
Every contract modification, change order or contract price adjustment up to $25,000.00 shall be subject to prior approval of the finance director. Every contract modification, change order or contract price adjustment between $25,000.00 and $75,000.00 shall be subject to prior approval of the city administrator. No contract modification, change order, or contract price adjustment shall be divided for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Section 2.7.23 - Project Manager. 
Project managers shall be appointed for each consulting, design and engineering project and each capital project involving new construction and/or maintenance or repairs. 
(a)  Appointment of project managers shall be made by the affected department head and approved by the city administrator. 
(b)  Only full-time employees of the City of Roswell can serve as project managers. 
(c)  Duties of project managers as defined by this section shall be incorporated in the employee personnel manual. 
( Ord. No. 2015-01-02, § 1, 01/26/2015 ) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1, Oct. 6, 2008, amended Ch. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3, §§ 3.1.1—3.1.3, 3.2.1—3.2.19, 3.3.1—3.3.6, 3.4.1—3.4.3, 3.5.1—3.5.14, 3.6.1—3.6.5, 3.7.1—3.7.20, and 3.8.1—3.8.11, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-02-03, adopted Feb. 19, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-02-02, adopted Feb. 18, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-09-03, adopted Sept. 9, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-12-32, adopted Dec. 8, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-01-03, adopted Jan. 5, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-04-06, adopted Apr. 12, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-05-08, adopted May 3, 2004; Ord. No. 2007-03-03, adopted Mar. 5, 2007; and Ord. No. 2008-01-01, adopted Jan. 7, 2008. 

Article 3.1 - In General 

Section 3.1.1 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(a)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(b)  Prevention of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(c)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
(d)  Promotion of appropriate land use and zoning and the effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies; 
(e)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
To the maximum extent possible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.1.2 - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the "Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code," O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1 to 3-12-3. 
(b)  As used in this chapter the singular and the plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(c)  As used in this chapter the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(d)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance of the City of Roswell who provides alcohol at special events or special events facilities. 
Alcoholic beverage license board is the body comprised of the city administrator or his designee, the director of finance or his designee, and the director of community development or his designee vested with authority to preside over the public hearing for applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses and with authority to grant or deny licenses to sell, serve, or handle alcoholic beverages. Also present at the public hearing as non-voting members of the board shall be the chief of police or his designee and the city attorney or his designee. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Roswell. 
Church means any permanent place of public religious worship. 
City means the City of Roswell and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the City of Roswell. 
Eating establishment means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, which such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or anatomical areas. 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the State of Georgia. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Immediate family of a person means all persons related to such person by consanguinity or affinity within the first degree, as computed according to civil law. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which and lot on which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the licensed premises. "Licensed premises" may include any sidewalk immediately adjacent to and abutting the main building of an eating establishment if such eating establishment maintains tables for service pursuant to a license or permit issued by the city and such area is enclosed by a fence or other barrier containing only one (1) opening for entering and exiting. 
Licensee includes an individual designated as licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the individual designated by such legal entity as licensee. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(A)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; 
(B)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(C)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Microbrewery means a manufacturer of malt beverages that produces fewer than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. 
Mixed drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to section 3.2.7. 
School building means a building in which the traditional subjects and learning processes associated with education are taught. 
Special entertainment district means a certain area within the city designated by mayor and council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
Special event pouring license means a temporary license issued for a limited amount of time pursuant to section 3.7.9 of this chapter. 
Supper club means an entertainment venue pursuant to section 3.7.5 of this chapter. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
Wine means an alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Mead or honey wine for purposes of this chapter shall be classified wine as provided for under the Georgia Department of Revenue Regulations. This definition shall not include cooking wine unsuitable for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-01 , § 2, Amended 1/22/2018; Ord. No. 2013-11-12, § 1, Amended 11/13/2013; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.1.3 - Review of Board Actions. 
In any case where this chapter calls for an action to be taken or a decision to be made by the alcoholic beverage licensing board, such action or decision may be appealed to the city council by any person aggrieved thereby. If such an appeal is not timely made (within thirty (30) days of the decision), the action or decision of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.2 - Licensing 

Section 3.2.1 - License Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.2 - Retail Package Licenses. 
Applicants may apply for one (1) or more of the following type retail licenses: 
(a)  Package malt beverage license: Retail sale of malt beverages in the original package. 
(b)  Package wine license: Retail sale of wine in the original package. 
(c)  Package distilled spirits license: Retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package. 
The fee for each such license shall be set by the mayor and council and approved by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.3 - Retail Consumption on the Premises Licenses. 
Six (6) classes of retail consumption on the premises licenses are available: 
(a)  Full pouring license: Retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and beer by the drink. 
(b)  Limited pouring license: Retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink. 
(c)  Brewpub: See subsection 3.1.2(d)(1) of this chapter. 
(d)  Farm winery tasting room: See section 3.7.8 of this chapter. 
(e)  Special event pouring license: See section 3.7.9 of this chapter. 
(f)  Craft beer and wine market: See section 3.7.18 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-06 , § 1, Amended 6/12/2017; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.4 - Wholesale Dealers. 
(a)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the State of Georgia and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. The license fee for a resident wholesale dealer's license shall be set by mayor and council and approved by resolution. 
(b)  Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the State of Georgia, who does not have a place of business in the city but who does business in the city, shall be registered in the city and subject to excise tax due from wholesale dealers pursuant to article 3.8, section 3.8.5. Such registration shall be renewed annually with: 
(1)  Submittal of annual renewal affidavit; 
(2)  The presentation of satisfactory evidence that he understands the alcoholic beverage rules and regulations of the city and the conditions under which retail licenses are issued; and 
(3)  A registration fee of $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.5 - Manufacturer. 
(a)  Brewery means a facility involved in the creation of malt beverages that produces fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels or more (or the equivalent) per year of malt beverages. 
(b)  Brewpub means an eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured subject to state law production limits. As used in this chapter, the term "eating establishment" means a business which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wines and which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, or to the public for consumption off the premises, as authorized by state law and City of Roswell ordinances, shall not be considered. 
(c)  Distillery means a facility involved in the creation of any alcoholic spirits beverage with an alcohol volume greater than twenty-one (21) percent. 
(d)  Microbrewery means a facility involved in the creation of malt beverages that produces fewer than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. 
(e)  Winery means a facility involved in the manufacturing of wine as defined in section 3.1.2(d) which shall include the manufacturing of mead or honey wine when the formula and process for manufacturing the mead has federal approval. A head of household may produce two hundred (200) gallons of wine within a calendar year for their personal use without being subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-01 , § 1, Amended 1/22/2018; Ord. No. 2015-08-24 , § 1, Added 08/10/2015) 
Section 3.2.6 - Alcoholic Beverage Caterers. 
(a)  License Requirements—Resident Caterers. 
(1)  Any alcoholic beverage retailer possessing a valid license from the City of Roswell to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off-premises license that authorizes sales at authorized catered event(s) or function(s). 
(2)  Each off-premises catering license as authorized herein shall be valid only for the calendar month in which the license is issued or for an individual event only. The fee for each such license shall be set by mayor and council and approved by resolution. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
(b)  Permit Requirements—Nonresident Caterers. Entities within the City that wish to host a special event using an alcoholic beverage caterer from another jurisdiction shall obtain a special event application from the community development department. The application for the special event permit shall include: 
(1)  The name of the nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer desired; 
(2)  A copy of the alcoholic beverage license and catering license issued by the jurisdiction in which the business is located; 
(3)  The quantity of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event(s) or functions(s). 
(4)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event(s) or function(s). 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the event permit. 
(c)  [Limitation of License.] A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)  Sunday Sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event or function on Sunday must possess a valid Sunday sales license and comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
( 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; 2015-07-17 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015; 2012-07-11, § 1, Amended 07/09/2012; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-08-24, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 2015, enacted new provisions designated as § 3.2.5. Inasmuch as section so numbered already exists, former §§ 3.2.5—3.2.10 have been redesignated as §§ 3.2.6—3.2.11, at the discretion of the editor. 
Section 3.2.7 - Duration of Licenses. 
All licenses, except catering licenses, shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year after July 1. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee for the calendar year. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial month shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
( 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 3.2.6. 
Section 3.2.8 - Individual, Business or Association Entities; Named Licensee. 
A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of the partner or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the stockholder, officer of the corporation, or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a purely nonprofit civic, fraternal, patriotic, or social club or corporation which is organized and conducted in the city solely as a mutual benefit membership group, shall be issued in the name of the club or corporation and in the name of the individual primarily responsible for the club or corporation's compliance with this chapter; and such individual shall be the named licensee. 
( 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 3.2.6. 
Section 3.2.9 - Joint Responsibility. 
In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation, its officers and directors shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a nonprofit organization, the organization and its officers, directors, or governing authority shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
( 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 3.2.6. 
Section 3.2.10 - Eligibility for License. 
(a)  Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall be not be considered active unless he is an owner, stockholder, or full-time employee of the licensed business and is present on the licensed premises a minimum of twenty (20) hours per week. 
(c)  A licensee must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted. Any such alien shall have been lawfully admitted for at least one (1) year prior to application. The City of Roswell may use any federal and/or state resources available to verification of status. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (c), a licensee for the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package must have been a resident of a county or municipality in the State of Georgia for one (1) year immediately preceding the filing of the application for such license in which the retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package is legal. 
(e)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the fifteen (15) years preceding his application of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes, or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. Sentencing as first offender status, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The alcoholic beverage license board may in its discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for purposes of this subsection if the board determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(f)  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five (5) years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
( 2019-02-10 , § 1, Amended 02/11/2019; 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 3.2.6. 
Section 3.2.11 - Training Certification Required. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this article shall present to the alcoholic beverage licensing board current certification of attendance at a TIPS (Training Intervention Procedures) or other approved program. Such TIPS certification or approved alternative program shall be verified and signed off by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  If the applicant lacks such training and certification, applicant shall have six (6) months from the date of the granting of the license to complete such training and submit certification to the alcoholic beverage licensing board. Upon due cause being shown, the chief of police may grant an extension of time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to complete said training. Failure to timely obtain such certification shall be grounds for revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
( 2015-08-24 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Editor's note— See Editor's Note for § 3.2.6. 
Section 3.2.12 - Reserved. 
Section 3.2.13 - Application Fee. 
Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount to be determined by mayor and council. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.14 - Application; Investigation Consent. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city. All applications shall contain a full and complete sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts relevant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and have a complete background check provided to the City of Roswell. Instructions for this process are attached to the application. 
(c)  The application form shall be accompanied by a copy of the lease to the premises, if any, and the articles of incorporation or partnership agreement where applicable. 
(d)  Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right that he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents for obtaining and using such information. 
(2010-03-05, § 3(Exh. C), Amended 03/01/2010; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.15 - Procedure for Consideration of Application. 
(a)  Each application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be referred to the chief of police or his designee for a thorough investigation. The chief of police or his designee shall report his findings to the alcohol beverage license board. Such finding shall include a recommendation as to the qualifications of the applicant. 
(b)  No application shall be considered by the alcoholic beverage license board until the city attorney or the assistant city attorney has indicated that in his/her opinion, upon the facts as stated by the report of the chief of police, no violation exists as to any ordinance in effect as of the date of the opinion. 
(c)  No application for an original license shall be granted until a public hearing has been held thereon before the alcoholic beverage license board, after notice as provided in section 3.2.16 below. The board will hold public hearings for the consideration of alcoholic beverage license applications on the first Thursday of each month, or at such other time as the board adopts upon proper notice. Any person may appeal actions or decisions of the alcoholic beverage license board within thirty (30) days of the board's decision to the full city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.16 - Notice Requirements. 
(a)  The applicant for an original license shall, at his own expense, post a notice on the premises to be licensed. The notice shall be posted for at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall be on a sign having a surface of not less than twelve (12) square feet. The notice shall be painted or printed in black letters at least three (3) inches in height against a white background. The notice shall state: 
(1)  That an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises has been filed with the City of Roswell; 
(2)  The type of license applied for; 
(3)  The time and place of the public hearing to be held on such license application; and 
(4)  The names in which the license is to be issued. 
The sign shall be placed facing the most traveled street and shall be situated so that passing motorists can read the sign. 
(b)  The applicant for an original license shall at his own expense publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city containing the information specified in subsection (a) for two (2) consecutive weeks. The first publication shall appear not more than twenty-eight (28) days prior to the date of the hearing and the second notice shall appear not more than fifteen (15) nor less than three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing. This notice shall be printed in letters no smaller than ten-point capital and lower case with at least a one-inch, two-column arrangement. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.17 - Transferability of License. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensed premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the alcoholic beverage license board determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all requirements of this chapter, when the time comes to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one (1) or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one (1) or more of the other partners; provided, such withdrawal shall not, without application for and issuance of a new license, introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the alcoholic beverage license board if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f)  In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the alcoholic beverage license board determines that the change results in a failure to meet requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.18 - Provisions for Temporary License. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city. 
(b)  In the case of the sudden withdrawal or transfer of the holder of the alcoholic beverage license, or sale of the licensed business, the alcoholic beverage license board or designee may issue a temporary license to the successor in interest if such successor in interest has properly completed an application form and paid the appropriate fee. The city attorney must verify that the successor in interest meets the qualifications for licensure and that no ordinance violations exist. Such temporary license shall be valid for sixty (60) days or until the application for a permanent license is granted or denied by the alcoholic beverage license board. A temporary license may be issued if the denial of such would create an undue hardship or cause an existing business to close. The fee for a temporary license shall be set by the mayor and council and is in addition to the regular application fee. 
(c)  Revocation of Temporary License. A temporary license issued under section 3.2.18 may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city administrator at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license under such sections shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.19 - License Renewal. 
(a)  An application for renewal may, if such is the case, be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any substantive changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall be filed during the month of October. 
(c)  Renewal applications not received by November 15 shall incur a late fee. 
(d)  No public hearing shall be required for the renewal of a license unless one (1) of the following conditions is present: 
(1)  A written objection or complaint regarding such licensee or licensed business is filed forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of such license; 
(2)  Any enforcement officer of the City of Roswell has submitted a report that the licensee or licensed premises are not in compliance with this ordinance or any provision of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances or any state law; 
(3)  The licensee or an employee of the licensed business has been cited for sale or service of alcoholic beverages to an underaged purchaser; 
(4)  The licensee or an employee of the licensed business has been charged with serving or selling alcoholic beverages to a visibly intoxicated individual; 
(5)  The issuance of the license was conditioned by the alcoholic beverage license board; or 
(6)  The licensee has not provided proof of licensing by the State of Georgia. 
In the event a public hearing is required, the applicant shall be apprised of the condition(s) necessitating such hearing and given ten (10) days' notice of the date of such hearing. The City of Roswell, at its expense, shall publish a notice describing the purpose of the hearing at least three (3) days prior to the hearing. The license for which renewal is sought shall continue until such hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.2.20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-08-24, § 2, adopted Aug. 10, 2015, repealed § 3.2.20, which pertained to manufacturers and derived from Ord. No. 2013-11-12, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2013. 
Article 3.3 - Penalties for Violation of Chapter 

Section 3.3.1 - General Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.3.2 - Suspension or Revocation of License. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked by the city council for any violation of this chapter; for any violation of state laws and regulations relating to alcoholic beverages; for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license; or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(b)  If a licensee or employee of such licensee is convicted for the first time of violating O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 or Section 3.5.4 of this Code, relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age, the following penalties shall apply. For purposes of this paragraph, a plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of bond shall constitute a conviction. 
(1)  Server or Handler. 
Upon the first offense, a server or handler providing alcoholic beverage to an individual under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be subject to a court appearance, a fine of $500.00, and suspension or revocation of such individual's handling permit for one (1) year; 
A second offense within five (5) years will subject the server or handler to court appearance, a fine of at least $500.00, but not more than $1,000.00, and suspension or revocation of his handling permit for three (3) years; 
A third offense within ten (10) years will subject the server or handler to court appearance, a fine of at least $500.00, but not more than $1,000.00, and forfeiture of the right to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a licensed establishment in Roswell. 
(2)  Licensee. 
Upon the first offense, the licensee whose establishment provides alcoholic beverage to an individual under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be subject to suspension of his alcoholic beverage license for a minimum of one (1) to ten (10) consecutive business days or revocation of his alcoholic beverage license, and a $1,000.00 to $2,000.00 fine, subject to mitigation. 
A second offense within twenty-four (24) months: a mandatory court appearance, a minimum license suspension of ten (10) to fifteen (15) consecutive business days or revocation of his alcoholic beverage license, and a fine from $2,500.00 to $10,000.00, subject to mitigation; and 
A third offense within twenty-four (24) months: a mandatory court appearance, a minimum license suspension of thirty (30) consecutive business days or revocation of his alcoholic beverage license, and a fine of $10,000.00 to $20,000.00, subject to mitigation. 
In the event an employee without a valid handling permit, or whose permit is suspended makes the underage sale, mitigation shall not be available. Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the city council from suspending a license for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) days, or from revoking such license if the city council, in its discretion, determines such is necessary. 
(3)  Underage Purchaser. 
Upon the first offense an underage person in possession of, or attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages shall be subject to mandatory court appearance and a fine of $500.00; and 
A second offense: a mandatory court appearance, a fine of from $500.00 to $1,000.00, and possible court ordered counseling; and 
A third offense: a mandatory court appearance, a fine of from $1,000.00 to $2,000.00, mandatory court ordered counseling and possible time in jail. 
(c)  Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the city council shall give at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing at which such suspension or revocation will be considered. Service of such notice shall be by personal service at the licensed premises on the named licensee or an employee of the licensee by a city police officer or code enforcement officer. If personal service fails, tacking a copy of the notice to the door of the licensed premises and mailing the original to the named licensee at the licensed premises with a copy mailed to any other address of the named licensee contained in the most recent license application on file with the city shall suffice. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.3.3 - Mitigating Factors. 
The penalties for establishments may be mitigated if such establishments are found to have maintained an effective compliance program with the chapter. Factors to be considered are: 
(a)  Whether and to what extent the establishment requires its servers to attend alcohol ordinance compliance seminars. 
(b)  Whether the establishment conducts its own "secret shopper" or internal "sting" operations. 
(c)  Whether the establishment has a written policy dealing with the problem of minors attempting to obtain alcohol at such establishment. 
(d)  Whether the establishment has appropriate signs and other displays such as "We I.D." or "If you're a minor, the soft drinks are this way." 
(e)  The degree to which the establishment has procedures in place to monitor its servers for compliance with the ordinance. 
(f)  Whether the establishment makes available a copy of the ordinance to its servers. 
(g)  Extent to which the establishment has met the other requirements of the ordinance. 
(h)  Whether the establishment enforces a zero tolerance policy in which employees are terminated for any violation of this chapter. 
(i)  Other evidence demonstrating, the establishment's compliance with the ordinance and prevention of underage drinking in the establishment and the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.3.4 - Voiding of License. 
A license shall become void by operation of law if: 
(a)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked; 
(b)  The business does not have a City of Roswell Business License; 
(c)  Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within fourteen (14) days after issuance of the license is approved by the city council or the alcoholic beverage license board; 
(d)  Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within nine (9) months after the license is issued; 
(e)  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then suspended for a period of thirty (30) days or more; 
(f)  The licensed business enters receivership, is the subject of levy or legal process, or fails to properly account for and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter; or 
(g)  Failure to submit proof of Alcoholic Beverage Training Intervention Procedures (TIPS), or other such training approved by the chief of police to the alcoholic beverage licensing board pursuant to section 3.2.10 of this chapter. 
Any licensed business for which a license has been voided by operation of law may make application to appeal such action to the mayor and council within five (5) business days of receipt of notice of the voiding of such license. Such hearing shall be afforded to show cause as to why the license should be reinstated. The mayor and council shall hear such appeal, if properly filed, at the next regularly scheduled meeting of council and may take any such action as deemed appropriate by a majority of councilmembers present regarding the reinstatement of such license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.3.5 - Emergency Suspension of Sales. 
The city administrator is authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under any license for any emergency situation when it deems such suspension necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor and council determine that the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the city council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless it is extended by mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.3.6 - Revocation of Temporary License. 
See subsection 3.2.18(d). 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.4 - Location of Sales 

Section 3.4.1 - Zoning Requirements; Existing Licenses. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted unless the premises to be licensed are located in the NX, CX, SH, CC, PV, CH, OR, IX or Historic Overlay District. No package malt beverage license or package wine license shall be granted in PV or the District formerly known as the Parkway Village Overlay District except in retail supermarkets having a gross building area of at least twenty-four thousand (24,000) square feet or in drug stores having a gross building area of at least eight thousand (8,000) square feet. No pouring license shall be granted in PV or the district formerly known as the Parkway Village Overlay District except at outlets licensed as restaurants under section 3.7.3 of this article, or as a "manufacturer" as defined in section 3.1.2 of this article. Any license application shall meet the distance requirements of section 3.4.2 of this article. 
(b)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses within the city limits in the trading area of the place for which a license is sought shall be considered a factor in issuing licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01-01 , § 3, Amended 1/22/2018; Ord. No. 2015-02-03, § 1, 02/23/2015 ; Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.4.2 - Distance from Churches, Schools, Etc. 
(a)  No package malt beverage license, package wine license, or consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subparagraph shall not apply to any location for which a license was issued prior to July 1, 1981, or to the renewal of such license. Further, this subparagraph shall not apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if such license could have been lawfully obtained at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application. Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit a grocery store holding a valid package malt beverage, package wine license or both from selling malt beverages or wine within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "grocery store" shall mean a properly zoned retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of which at least eighty-five (85) percent is reserved for the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages and which conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space. 
(b)  No package distilled spirits license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or alcoholic treatment center or which is located within two hundred (200) yards of a school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus or which is located within five hundred (500) yards of another licensed package distilled spirits business. 
(c)  No package license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within two hundred (200) feet of a private single-family or two-family dwelling; provided, however, this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a private dwelling located in a zoning district in which alcoholic beverage outlets are authorized and which dwelling is on the same street as the premises for which a package license is applied. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by law for all retail package licenses, measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the structure from which beverage alcohol is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  To the front door of the building of a church, government owned treatment center or a retail package store; or 
(3)  To the nearest property line of the real property being used for school or educational purposes. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided by law for all consumption on the premises licenses, measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road, or highway by the nearest route; and 
(4)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(f)  No application for a license shall be approved which does not include, or have attached thereto, a current certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this section, or a certificate from a registered surveyor which states that the subject alcoholic beverage outlet meets all of the location and distance requirements of this ordinance, and shows such location's compliance or noncompliance with linear foot measurements where appropriate or required. 
(g)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's certificate, as required under subsection (e) of this section, clearly showing that the premises will when completed meet the requirements of this section. 
( 2015-08-23 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; 2010-03-05, § 1(Exh. A), Amended 03/01/2010; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.4.3 - Sales on Public Property. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any alcoholic beverage in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. 
(b)  Private parties and organizations may secure a permit from the city administrator or his/her designee to serve or sell alcoholic beverages on property owned or leased by the City of Roswell. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.5 - Business Regulations 

Section 3.5.1 - Rent Based on Sales Volume Prohibited; Exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(c)  Mayor and council may grant a licensee an exemption from the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.2 - Display of License and License Number. 
(a)  Each place of business licensed under this chapter shall have displayed on the front window or door the correct number of the license. Such display shall be in uniform letters not less than one and one-half (1½) inches in height in substantially the following form: 
"City Retail License No. XXXXXXXX" 
(b)  Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.3 - Purchase and Sales Records. 
Every licensee shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee. All consumption on the premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times be open for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three (3) years, unless the city administrator, upon approval by mayor and council authorizes the disposal of records prior to the expiration of three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.4 - Sale To, Purchase or Possession by Underage Person. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(5)  No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply when the parent or guardian of the underage person gives the alcoholic beverage to the underage person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be violated when a person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and which gives such person's date of birth. Proper identification includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A., §§ 40-5-100—40-5-104. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age in licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 3.6.1. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could doubt whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is twenty-one (21) years of age or older, the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage shall request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (d) of this section. The failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than twenty-one (21) years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(g)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonably prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(h)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as set forth in subsection 3.3.2(b). 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.5 - Days When Sales Unlawful. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or during any time of day when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  No person shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday unless such sales are permitted by state law and the requisite fee for Sunday sales is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-06 , § 2, Amended 6/12/2017; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008; Ord. No. 2011-08-10, § 1, 8/8/2011) 
Section 3.5.6 - Hours of Operation. 
(a)  A package licensee shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, provided that if such package licensee is authorized for Sunday sales such package licensee may also engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Package licensees shall not permit their places of business to be open when sales of alcoholic beverages are not permitted except that where the primary business of the package licensee is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, such restrictive hours shall apply only with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, and any time from 11:55 p.m. on Saturdays until 1:55 a.m. on Sundays. Provided application for Sunday sales is made and the established fee is paid, any licensed establishment which derives fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross income from rental of rooms for overnight lodging, may sale alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(c)  The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be from sunup to sundown only on days on which package licensees are authorized to sell alcoholic beverages at retail. 
( 2018-07-10 , § 1, Amended 07/23/2018; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008; Ord. No. 2011-08-10, § 2, 8/8/2011) 
Section 3.5.7 - Prohibited Acts, Sexual Display. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any: disorderly conduct; breach of the peace; lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practices; or noise which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(e)  No licensee shall allow live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (d) of this section, or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act prohibited by law. 
(2)  The caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(3)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(f)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (d) or (e) above. Nothing contained in subsections (d) through (f) shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than twenty (20) percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcohol beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.8 - Delivery and Storage. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises in the original container and in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler) with a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city. Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.9 - On-Premises Consumption Unlawful. 
Except as provided in section 3.5.10 and/or section 3.7.18 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises except as provided herein in section 3.5.10 and/or section 3.7.18 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-06 , § 3, Amended 6/12/2017; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008; Ord. No. 2011-12-15, § 1, 12/12/2011) 
Section 3.5.10 - Ancillary Wine, Beer and Malt Beverage Tasting License. 
(a)  The holder of a package beer and wine license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of wine, beer and malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine, beer and malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine, beer or malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with education classes and sampling designed to promote wine, beer and malt beverage appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine, beer or malt beverage tasting for customers shall be conducted only at a counter area constituting no more than ten (10) percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Such sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one (1) time per day, on the days of the week authorized by State law to sell beer and wine by the package, for a period of not to exceed two (2) consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two (2) ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight (8) ounces in any two-hour period; and 
(e)  The holder of an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes not more than two (2) times per week for a period of not to exceed two (2) consecutive hours. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(f)  Wine, beer and malt beverage bottles shall be opened by the licensee or an employee only, and samples shall be poured only by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(g)  No open containers of wine, beer or malt beverage shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(i)  Such sampling and tasting is permitted within the enclosed portion of the premises only. 
(j)  The annual fee for an ancillary wine, beer and malt beverage tasting license shall be set and may be revised by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-12-15, § 1, 12/12/2011) 
Section 3.5.11 - Reserved. 
Section 3.5.12 - Regulation of Signs and Lighting. 
(a)  Outside signs shall not be illuminated, nor shall the place of business or its premises be otherwise illuminated except at such times as the place of business is lawfully open for business. This prohibition, however, shall not prohibit a night light for safety purposes. 
(b)  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times when the premises are open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.13 - Sanitary Condition of Premises Required. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by the chief of police, the fire marshal, and other authorized agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.5.14 - Change of Ownership, Profit Distribution Report Required. 
A licensee shall file with the city a written, sworn report of any of the following changes: 
(a)  Any change in any legal relationship between any parties named in the application for the license; 
(b)  Any change in the payment of rent for leased premises or any change in the ownership of the licensed premises; 
(c)  Any loss or damage to goods or premises of the licensee which results in a claim against an insurance policy; 
(d)  Any change in the division of the profits from the licensed business; 
(e)  Any change for any purpose in division of net or gross sales of the licensed business; 
(f)  Any change in any material facts contained in the application for the license; 
(g)  Such report shall be filed within five (5) days after the date of the change. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.6 - Employment Restrictions and Handling Requirements 

Section 3.6.1 - Age Requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age who, in the course of such employment would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit persons sixteen (16) years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the term grocery stores or supermarkets shall not include convenience stores. 
(2010-03-05, § 2(Exh. B), Amended 03/01/2010; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.6.2 - "Handling" not to Include Bagging and Carrying Out. 
For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store, or similar establishment shall not constitute the handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.6.3 - Handling Permit Required. 
(a)  An employee handling permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any employee of a package licensee whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Any employee of a package licensee who sells alcoholic beverages in a convenience store or service station. 
(3)  Any employee of a consumption on the premises licensee who serves or works in the serving area, including bar or lounge area of the licensed premises. 
(4)  Any employee of an alcoholic beverage caterer who is engaged in handling, selling or serving alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  On or after April 15, 2000, any employee of a grocery store, drug store, variety store, membership warehouse, or department store who serves as a cashier at a check-out station where alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have a handling permit until such person has procured such permit. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain a handling permit shall apply to the city police department for such permit. Only one (1) handling permit per individual will be issued for employment at any establishment within the city. The permit will be valid for a period of two (2) years and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. The fee for a handling permit is set by mayor and council. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other investigation as may be required by the police department. 
(d)  The police department may provisionally grant a handling permit to a person applying for a card, pending investigation and report. Where said report, when received, is unfavorable, the chief of police may revoke the permit and demand its return. 
(e)  The chief of police may revoke an employee' s handling permit and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter or becomes one who adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(f)  Any conviction for violation of the provisions of this chapter, or of state law shall result in the automatic suspension of the handling permit. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose handling permit has been revoked and upon whom demand for return of the card has been made to refuse to return the card or to alter, conceal, deface, or destroy the card. 
(h)  When a person applies for a handling permit, the chief of police or his designee shall have a complete and extensive search made to determine if there is a police record of such person. If there is a record of conduct prohibited by this chapter or evidence that the person's employment would adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare, issuance of a permit shall be denied. 
(i)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued an employee handling permit if the chief of police receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the card, the card may be revoked following notice and a hearing. 
(j)  When any employee's handling permit is denied or revoked, the chief of police shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter stating that the person does not meet the requirements of this chapter and that upon request the chief of police will refer the matter and any evidence the person cares to submit in his behalf to alcoholic beverage license board for consideration. If the person requests consideration by the alcoholic beverage license board, the entire record will be sent to the alcoholic beverage license board. The alcoholic beverage license board shall consider all matters presented and make a decision as to whether the person qualifies for handling the sales or service of alcoholic beverages under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.6.4 - Employment of Certain Persons Prohibited. 
No licensee shall employ on any licensed premises, in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers, and musicians, any person who has been convicted within the preceding ten (10) years of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.6.5 - Licensee to Report Disciplinary Action. 
Any licensee who has any arrest, citation or other disciplinary action taken against him or any of his employees who sell, take orders for, deliver, or handle alcoholic beverages by any governmental authority (municipal, county, state, or federal) shall notify the chief of police and the city attorney in writing of such action within five (5) days of such action, naming the offense(s), date(s), location of such action and outcome if known. The following shall be considered to be "disciplinary action:" any arrest; the issuance of any citation; any indictment, presentment, or accusation; any conviction, including the acceptance of a plea of nolo contendere; any penalty imposed by any regulatory agency; and any other written charge or reprimand against the licensee or any of his employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply with respect to traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.7 - Requirements for Consumption On-Premises Licenses 

Section 3.7.1 - Eligibility for License. 
A consumption on the premises license may be granted only to the establishments described in this article and subject to the specified conditions. No consumption on the premises license shall be issued to any erotic dance establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.2 - Hotel. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a hotel must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where food is served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to guests for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain fifty (50) or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests; and 
(3)  Contain one (1) or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff and a seating capacity, at tables, of at least one hundred (100) persons, where meals are regularly served. 
(b)  A hotel may consist of a single building or may consist of two (2) or more buildings located on the same premises and used in connection with the hotel operation. 
(c)  A facility which is styled as a motel, motor lodge, inn, or other similar appellation may be licensed as a hotel if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(d)  A hotel may grant a franchise for the operation of a lounge, restaurant, or supper club on its premises; such a franchised operation may be granted a consumption on the premises license if it meets the other applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.3 - Restaurant. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant must: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals are regularly served to the public for adequate pay; 
(2)  Contain one (1) or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Serve at least one (1) meal per day at least five (5) days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(4)  Have at least fifty (50) percent of its total sales be the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(5)  Brewpubs, as defined in subsection 3.1.2(d)(1) of this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(3) shall be allowed in eating establishments. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a restaurant shall legally maintain either a seating capacity of sixty (60) people at tables (which total may include approved outdoor seating) or an indoor seating capacity, at tables, equal to at least sixty (60) percent of its maximum occupancy load (as set by the fire safety code or building code, whichever is less, as determined by the fire marshal or chief building official of the City of Roswell). If a restaurant meets the requirements of this section and all other requirements of local and state law, it shall be eligible for either a limited pouring license or a full pouring license. 
(2010-06-11, § 1, Amended 6/21/2010; 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.4 - Lounge. 
(a)  A lounge is a separate room that has a seating capacity, at tables of at least one hundred (100) persons and which is: 
(1)  Connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant; or 
(2)  Located in a hotel. 
(b)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a lounge must be arranged and maintained such that all booths, stools, and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other customers in the lounge. 
(c)  A lounge which is operated on a different floor from or in a separate building from, or which is not connected or adjacent to, another licensed facility shall be considered a separate establishment from such other licensed facility and shall pay a separate annual license fee. 
(2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.5 - Supper Club. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a supper club must: 
(a)  Have a seating capacity, at tables, of at least sixty (60) persons; 
(b)  Have adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its patrons, except that this requirement shall not apply to a supper club which is located in a hotel having separate kitchen facilities of which the supper club makes use or to a supper club that utilizes, under one (1) point of sale (POS) system, licensed mobile food vendors approved under article 10.15 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances; 
(c)  Provide a band or other professional entertainment a minimum of twenty (20) days in each calendar month, each and every calendar month of the calendar year, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating; 
(d)  Be arranged and maintained such that all booths and tables are open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(e)  Serve at least one (1) meal per day at least five (5) days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecoration; and 
(f)  Have as at least fifty (50) percent of its total sales the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, exclusive of sales from vending machines; and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge or cover charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
( 2018-11-18 , § 1, Amended 11/26/2018; 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.6 - Private Clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a nonprofit association which is organized under the laws of this state and which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofit purposes; 
(4)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
(A)  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
(B)  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(C)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(3) of this section, a "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.7 - Special Events Facility. 
In order to be eligible for a consumption on the premises license, a special events facility must: 
(a)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; 
(b)  For monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used primarily for special occasions, including but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; and 
(c)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; or 
(d)  Be a multi-sport complex situated on at least twenty (20) acres in the DX district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.8 - Farm Winery Tasting Room. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Farm winery means a domestic winery that is licensed as a farm winery by the State of Georgia. 
Special Entertainment District means a certain area within the city designated by mayor and council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2 solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for retail sale of such wine as provided by law. Samples of wine can be given complimentary or for a fee. 
(b)  There is hereby created a license for the business of operating a Georgia farm winery tasting room in conformance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
(c)  Under this section, the licensee shall be authorized to carry on the business of operating a farm winery tasting room in the licensed premises. For the purposes of this chapter, upon application, a certain location may be designated by the mayor and council as a Special Entertainment District pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.2. Such designation is made solely for the purpose of allowing Sunday sales in a farm winery tasting room. 
(d)  The farm winery tasting room created by this section is limited to farm wineries licensed by the State of Georgia and allows the licensee to deal in its farm winery products pursuant to state law. No license is created by this section authorizing any other person to deal in any other alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.9 - Catering Permits in Conjunction with a Special Event. 
(a)  A special event permit applicant that does not have a current City of Roswell alcoholic beverage license and is not a bona fide nonprofit civic organization who desires to sell or serve alcoholic beverages temporarily (no more than three (3) days) for consumption on a non-licensed premises during a special event shall employ, use or contract with an alcoholic beverage caterer for such service. 
(b)  If an existing alcoholic beverage licensee desires to sell or serve alcoholic beverages temporarily (no more than three (3) days) for consumption on a non-licensed premises, said licensee shall obtain an alcoholic beverage catering license pursuant to Section 3.2.5 of this chapter in conjunction with a special event permit. 
(c)  If an existing alcoholic beverage licensee desires to sell or serve alcoholic beverages temporarily for consumption beyond the licensed premises but either connected to the licensed premises or on the same property under their sole possession, said licensee shall obtain a special event permit but is not required to obtain a catering license since the special event is an extension of the licensed premises. 
(d)  A bona fide nonprofit civic organization that desires to sell or serve alcoholic beverages temporarily (no more than three (3) days) for consumption on a non-licensed premises during a special event shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to obtain a permit authorizing the organization to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of the special event. No more than two (2) permits may be issued to an organization in any one (1) calendar year. The organization shall hire an off-duty police officer of competent jurisdiction to be present during the event. For the purposes of this section, a bona fide "nonprofit civic organization" is defined as an organization which is an exempt organization under Section 501(c) or (d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(2012-07-11, § 2, Amended 07/09/2012) 
Section 3.7.10 - Physical Requirements of Premises. 
All lounge and restaurant areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(a)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(b)  Sales to hotel guests in their hotel rooms; 
(c)  Private clubs; or 
(d)  Special events facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.11 - Employees of Supper Club or Lounge not to Mingle with Customers. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of a supper club or lounge to dance or sit with customers on the premises. It shall be unlawful for any customer to purchase food or drink for an employee of a lounge or supper club on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.12 - Live Music and Dancing. 
Bands or orchestras and patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(a)  Adequate space exists; 
(b)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(c)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the chief of the fire department has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.13 - Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages by Licensee. 
Licensees under this chapter shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of one (1) liter or larger unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers, in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such size containers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.14 - Package Sales Prohibited. 
Except as provided in section 3.7.18 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be sold by the package from a premises licensed for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06-06 , § 4, Amended 6/12/2017; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.15 - Carry-Out of Alcoholic Beverage Unlawful. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees and/or manufacturers shall be consumed only on the licensed premises unless allowed by state law or as provided in subsection (c) of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises or by manufacturer unless specifically permitted by state law (See O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4) or as specifically permitted by the Roswell Mayor and Council. The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person removes any unauthorized alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Each consumption on the premises licensee and/or manufacturer shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
"It is a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell to take any type [of] alcoholic beverage out of this establishment unless specifically permitted by state law or City of Roswell Ordinance." 
Such sign shall be in uniform letters not less than one (1) inch in height. 
(c)  Exceptions—Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted—Restaurant districts. 
(1)  For the purposes of this chapter only, a restaurant district is defined as follows: A specifically authorized and pedestrian oriented area of the city as established by resolution of mayor and council that allows those establishments with valid consumption on the premises and/or manufacturer (excluding distilleries) licenses within such area to dispense and/or serve an alcoholic beverage for "carry out" purposes provided all other laws, rules and ordinances are followed. 
(2)  One (1) drink per person on-street limit. Within a restaurant district, any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises and/or any manufacturer (excluding distilleries) is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container that is not a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no person shall remove more than one (1) such alcoholic beverage per person from the licensed premises at a time. 
(3)  Size limited to a maximum of sixteen (16) ounces. Within a restaurant district, no container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks or in other public places within a restaurant district any open alcoholic beverage container that exceeds sixteen (16) fluid ounces in size. 
(4)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful within a restaurant district for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass, or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private. 
(5)  Purchase from licensed premises within the restaurant district. Alcoholic beverages consumed pursuant to this provision must be purchased from a licensed premises within the restaurant district. 
(6)  Consumption limited to certain areas in the restaurant district. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside of the restaurant district, upon any sidewalk adjacent to a church, school or park (unless specifically authorized by the City of Roswell) or upon any private property without the express written consent of the property owners. Nothing in this ordinance or any resolution enacting a restaurant district shall be construed as to allow the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in city parks or recreation buildings. The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in city parks and/or recreation buildings provided there is strict compliance with section 14.2.4 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances regarding signage and/or published rules of such park allowing such alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Consumption limited to lawful hours of operation. Unless authorized by mayor and council in the resolution creating the restaurant district, no alcoholic beverage purchased within the restaurant district pursuant to this provision shall be consumed within the restaurant district on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private, prior to 11:00 a.m. or later than 11:00 p.m. 
( 2018-05-08 , § 1, Amended 05/29/2018; 2016-06-07 , § 1, Amended 03/13/2016; Ord. No. 2015-03-06, § 1, 03/23/2015 ; Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.16 - Brown-Bag, "BYOB." 
Except as provided in this section, it is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage in any retail establishment without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, provided however, alcohol may be furnished at a special event if a valid permit for such event is issued by the City of Roswell. For the purposes of this section, the term "retail establishment" shall not include a private hotel room or similar guest room or a private club. 
Notwithstanding any other contrary provision of this chapter, any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to bring into the restaurant one (1) unopened bottle of wine for consumption on the premises if the patron purchases a meal and consumes a portion of the bottle of wine during the meal on the restaurant's premises. Should the patron wish to take the unfinished portion of the bottle of wine from the premises, such bottle of wine shall be resealed in accordance with section 3.7.15 of this chapter. In order for this provision to apply, the restaurant must establish a policy for permitting this practice and may in its own discretion charge a corkage fee. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a restaurant to establish such a policy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008; Ord. No. 2011-12-15, § 3, 12/12/2011) 
Section 3.7.17 - "Happy Hour" Discounts; Other Unlawful Practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one (1) alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Selling distilled spirits in containers or glasses containing more than one and one-half (1½) ounces of distilled spirits; 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm, or organization for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.7.18 - Craft Beer and Wine Market. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a licensed craft beer and wine market as defined herein may be entitled to sale certain package malt beverages and to allow consumption on the premises of craft beers and wines provided the following criteria are met: 
(a)  Craft beer shall be defined for purposes of this section as a malt beverage produced at a brewery whose annual production is six million (6,000,000) barrels of beer or less (approximately three (3) percent of U.S. annual sales). Craft beer production is attributed to the rules of alternating proprietorships and the total beverage alcohol volume and flavor is derived from traditional or innovative brewing ingredients and their fermentation. 
(b)  Craft beer and wine market shall for purposes of this section be a retail establishment whose primary sales (over seventy (70) percent) are from craft beers and wine. Craft beer and wine market shall offer a minimum of one hundred (100) different beer/wine selections. Sales of craft beers and wines may be for consumption on the premises and/or package (including growlers), provided however, the sale and/or consumption of distilled spirits is strictly prohibited at such locations. Craft beer and wine markets shall be permitted in areas currently zoned to allow for consumption on the premises and shall meet all distance requirements for a consumption on the premises license. 
(c)  Wine and craft beers to be consumed on the premises of a craft beer and wine market shall only be opened by the licensee or an employee of the craft beer and wine market. Wine and craft beers to be consumed on premise shall not include growlers or packaged beer. 
(d)  No open containers of wine, beer or malt beverages shall be removed from the licensed premises unless in compliance with state law and section 3.7.15 of this article. 
(e)  The sale of food is expressly permitted in a craft beer and wine market provided all applicable laws and regulations are complied with. 
(f)  Craft beer and wine markets shall not open before 11:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and shall make no package sales after 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Sunday sales, if licensed, shall be permitted for craft beer and wine between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. Craft beer and wine markets may allow consumption on the premises between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday (into Sunday) and, if licensed, on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
( 2018-05-08 , § 2, Amended 05/29/2018; Ord. No. 2017-06-06 , § 5, Added 6/12/2017) 
Section 3.7.19 - Reserved. 
Section 3.7.20 - Hotel, In-Room Service. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any hotel (as the term " hotel" is commonly used and without regard to the requirements of section 3.7.2), inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire, may provide "in-room service" of alcoholic beverages if such establishment: 
(1)  Holds a valid city package license or a valid city consumption on the premises license or both; and 
(2)  Has been authorized to provide "in-room service" by the state revenue commissioner. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, "in-room service" consists of: 
(1)  The delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages by an employee of the hotel to a registered guest's room when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and 
(2)  The provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guest room which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, in-room service of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all restrictions and limitations in this chapter relative to the sale of alcoholic beverages. In-room service sales shall be authorized only on such days and only during such hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages is otherwise authorized. 
(d)  Distilled spirits sold pursuant to this section shall not be sold in packages containing less than fifty (50) milliliters each. 
(e)  All alcoholic beverages sold pursuant to this section shall be purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer and shall be subject to all taxes imposed under this chapter, including the excise tax on mixed drinks where alcoholic beverages are sold as a mixed drink or the ingredients for a mixed drink. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Article 3.8 - Excise Tax 

Section 3.8.1 - Tax Imposed on Sale of Mixed Drinks. 
There is imposed upon the sale of mixed drinks in the city a tax in the amount of three (3) percent of the purchase price of the mixed drink to the consumer. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.2 - Licensee to Collect and Remit. 
Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of mixed drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the city administrator to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.3 - Customer Receipts; Credit Sales. 
If requested by the purchaser, a consumption on the premises licensee shall give to the purchaser a receipt on which the purchase price and the tax imposed by this article shall be itemized separately. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the mixed drink to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.4 - Payment and Returns by Licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the twentieth day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of each month, a return for the preceding month shall be filed with the city finance director or her designee by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the city administrator may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of mixed drinks and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. Any amounts collected in excess of three (3) percent of the taxable sales shall be reported and paid to the city. 
(c)  Licensees shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.5 - Excise Tax—Wholesalers. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the twentieth day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.6 - Reserved. 
Section 3.8.7 - Deficiency Assessment. 
(a)  If the city finance director has cause to believe that a return or the amount of tax paid to the city by a licensee is not proper, she may compute and determine the amount due on the basis of any information available to her. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any month. 
(b)  The amount of a deficiency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of the taxes. 
(c)  The city finance director shall give notice of a deficiency determination to the licensee. The notice may be served by a code enforcement officer or by mail. Service by mail shall be addressed to the named licensee at the licensed premises, shall be made by certified mail, and is complete when delivered with a receipt signed by the addressee or by the receipt of mailing. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the month following the month for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.8 - Failure to File Return. 
(a)  If a licensee fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the tax due for the period or periods for which a return was not filed. Such estimate may be based on any information available to the city finance director. Written notice of the estimate shall be given to the licensee in the manner specified by subsection 3.8.7(a). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day on which the return could have been timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.9 - Penalties and Interest. 
Any licensee who falls to pay to the city within the time required any amount required to be paid under this article shall pay a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount not timely paid, in addition to the principal unpaid amount and interest at the rate of one and one-half (1½) percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.10 - Actions for Collection; Overpayment. 
(a)  At any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any amount due under this article, the city administrator or his designee may, subject to the approval of the mayor and council, bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state, or the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Whenever any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset against any future liability for the tax. 
(c)  If the licensee determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once and such fact has not yet been determined by the city, the licensee shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim with respect to such overpayment or double payment. Such claim shall be in writing and shall state the specific grounds upon which it is based. The claim shall be audited. If mayor and council approves the claim, the excess amount paid may be credited against any other amounts due from the licensee or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Section 3.8.11 - Administration and Enforcement of Article. 
(a)  The city finance director or her designee shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The mayor and council may promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Every licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as may be required by the city. 
(d)  The city administrator or any person authorized in writing by the mayor and council may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, and facilities of any licensee engaging in the sale of mixed drinks in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if no return is made to ascertain the amount of tax due. 
(e)  In administration of the provisions of this article, mayor and council may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody any information relating to purchases subject to taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-15, § 1(Exh. A), 10/06/2008) 
Chapter 4 - ADULT BUSINESSES & ENTERTAINMENT 
Article 4.1 - Adult Businesses—General 

Section 4.1.1 - Purpose and Findings. 
The mayor and council of the City of Roswell based on the experiences of other communities and municipalities, on studies, reports and findings of other communities, specifically Indianapolis, Indiana; Austin, Texas; St. Paul, Minnesota; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Manatee County, Florida; Smyrna, Georgia; and Richmond County, Georgia which are experiences and findings relevant to the problems faced by the City of Roswell find and declare that adult businesses, by their nature, generate secondary effects unless regulated. These effects as testified to by Major Jim Mullins (retired) a thirty-year veteran with the City of Atlanta Police Department, Major Ken Burnette (retired) a twenty-eight-year veteran from the City of Atlanta Police Department, V. R. Stuebing, land use, planning and zoning expert, and Captain Joan Krol of the Roswell Police Department include blight, downgrading of neighborhoods, lowering of property values, and a tendency to attract undesirable persons who may engage in certain types of criminal conduct. Among the acts identified with such establishments are disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking and drug use. Experience in other cities has shown that where adult businesses are concentrated, neighborhoods deteriorate and the areas become less desirable places in which to work and live. Accordingly, the purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. 
The following sections are intended to be a carefully tailored regulation to minimize the adverse land use impact caused by the undesirable secondary effects of adult bookstores, adult businesses and erotic dance establishments. The mayor and council find that restricting adult businesses to industrially zoned areas and imposing development standards can legitimately regulate adult businesses by establishing zones where adult businesses are most compatible with other uses or the surrounding neighborhood, and by requiring minimum distances to be maintained between adult business uses and other uses so as to afford the most protection to residential uses. 
This chapter represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and adult businesses versus the protected rights of such businesses and their patrons. It is not the intent of the mayor and council, in enacting this ordinance, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor is it the intent to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented films, videotapes, books, or other materials. Further, the mayor and council do not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor do they intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials may have to sell, distribute, or exhibit such constitutionally protected materials. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004; 2000-07-03, Amended, 07/05/2000) 
Section 4.1.2 - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore . A bookstore having a substantial or significant portion of its publications, books, magazines, periodicals, videotapes, and other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this article. 
Adult business . Any business or establishment where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities for the purpose of sexual gratification or any business which offers its patrons goods, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. A business or establishment offering goods, articles, publications, books, magazines, movies, videotapes or other reproductions relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall not be deemed an adult business if the segment or section devoted to the sale of such materials comprises less than five (5) percent of its total space. 
Adult movie house means a theater used on a regular basis for presenting X-rated movies or material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five (5) percent of its total space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, which such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau means any person who for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers, or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provide, or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. 
Good moral character . A person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere. 
Mainstream performance house shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, museum or a similar establishment which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or featuring of specified anatomical areas and where such depiction, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this chapter, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(b)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pedophilia; or 
(b)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(c)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(d)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(e)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(f)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(g)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five (5) percent or more of its total space devoted to the sale or display of such material or an establishment which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall include adult video stores as defined in section 4.1.2. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004; 2003-08-19, Amended, 08/18/2003, Adult video store and video store; 2001-09-04, Added, 09/05/2001, Video Store definition) 
Section 4.1.3 - Mainstream Performance Houses. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to the premises or employees of any mainstream performance house. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.4 - Certain Activities Prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.5 - Operation of Unlicensed Premises Unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult business unless such business shall have a valid current license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required under this chapter, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.6 - Admission of Minors Unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment to admit or permit the admission of minors on the premises. It shall also be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, or give or to offer or sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult gift shop, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult business. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.7 - Location. 
No adult business shall be located: 
(a)  Within one hundred (100) yards of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; and 
(b)  Within one hundred (100) yards of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; and 
(c)  Within five hundred (500) yards of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; and 
(d)  Within one hundred (100) yards of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; and 
(e)  On less than one (1) acre of land containing at least one hundred fifty (150) feet of road frontage; and 
(f)  In any district other than one that is zoned for and meets all requirements of IX or IL; and 
(g)  In any building which has within the past eighteen (18) months been used for purposes of or in the commission of solicitation, prostitution, or other illicit acts. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight-line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. "as the crow flies." The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
State Law reference— Counties and municipalities authorized to restrict adult businesses, O.G.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Section 4.1.8 - Reserved. 
Section 4.1.9 - Adult Business Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult business shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file an application with the city administrator or his designated representative of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city administrator or his designated representative and shall receive a permit from the city administrator or his designated representative. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city administrator or his designated representative requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Roswell or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the city administrator or his designated representative for a hearing. The decision of the city administrator or his designated representative after hearing may be appealed to the city council. An investigation fee shall accompany the application. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of permit. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the City of Roswell, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.10 - Application for Adult Business License. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult business shall make application to the city administrator or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee of $500.00 shall be paid to the city administrator or his designated representative to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. 
(b)  The filing of an application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.11 - Application Contents. 
Each application for an adult business license shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(b)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application, and the dates of residence at each. 
(d)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(e)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth. 
(f)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, taken within the last six (6) months. 
(g)  Business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five (5) percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(h)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state, or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(i)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(j)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged. 
(k)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(l)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters as required to be set forth in the application. 
(m)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, of directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(n)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of a crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(o)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(p)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(q)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a Code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. 
(r)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(s)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(t)  Each application for an adult business license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.12 - Application; Investigation. 
The city shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city administrator may grant the license if he finds: 
(a)  The required application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(d)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(e)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as a felony, or any crime or code violation involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(f)  The applicant has not had an adult business license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(g)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(h)  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(i)  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager, has not, within five (5) years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur. 
(j)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(k)  The proposed premises is not to be located within a prohibited distance to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder. 
(l)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Roswell, State of Georgia or the United States. 
(m)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Roswell or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.13 - Persons Prohibited as Licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or stockholders holding over five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five (5) percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of Roswell. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. , (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.14 - License—Refusal. 
If the city administrator or his designee, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall, within ten (10) days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council pursuant to section 4.1.19. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.15 - Fee. 
The annual license fee is $5,000.00 for erotic dance establishments and $2,000.00 for all other adult businesses. There shall be no prorating of license fees, and the license fee for any partial calendar year shall be the same as the fee for a full calendar year. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.16 - Renewal. 
Licenses for adult businesses may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fees for all adult business licenses, other than erotic dance establishments, shall be $2,000.00. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.17 - Nontransferable. 
No adult business license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such licensee shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license; and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.18 - Change of Location or Name. 
(a)  No adult business shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of $2,000.00 has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city administrator or his designated representative and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this Code have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.19 - Appeal Procedure. 
The licensee shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified on an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city administrator. 
The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the application for city council action. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.20 - City Council Hearing. 
Whenever an appeal has been scheduled before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties, and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action for which complaint is made. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.21 - Signs. 
No depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be visible from outside the structure of an adult business or on signage outside the structure. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.22 - Violations; Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.23 - Unlawful Operation Declared Nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.24 - Cleaning of Licensed Premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. The person in charge of the licensed premises shall supervise this activity. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement; and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.25 - Self-Inspection of Licensed Premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city administrator or his designated representative. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.1.26 - Abatement as Sanitary Nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Sections 4.1.27—4.1.29 - Reserved. 
Article 4.2 - Erotic Dance Establishments 

Section 4.2.1 - Erotic Dance Establishment Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment to be located in the City of Roswell without a valid adult business license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city administrator showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  An erotic dance establishment may be open between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 5:00 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Sundays. 
(f)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(g)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
(h)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor. 
(i)  No dancing shall occur closer than four (4) feet to any patron. 
(j)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(k)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(l)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(m)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3.5) foot-candles per square foot. 
(n)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.2.2 - Violation; Penalties. 
Any violation of the restrictions related to erotic dance establishments shall be a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with section 1.1.3 of the Code of the City of Roswell. Any dancer who accepts gratuities for his or her performance of otherwise violates the restrictions of this article may have his or her permit for working in an adult business revoked. 
Any erotic dance establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoining thereof, in the manner provided by law. The city shall further be authorized to take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate such nuisance and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an erotic dance establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Article 4.3 - Adult Bookstores and Video Stores 

Section 4.3.1 - Purpose and Findings. 
Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties, including, but not limited to Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dayton, Ohio; Gwinnett County, Georgia; and Fulton County, Georgia which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by Roswell, Georgia, and based on documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners' public hearing and regular meeting on August 7, 2001, the mayor and council of the City of Roswell take note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex to occur at adult bookstores and video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing materials, films, videos, or other reproductions depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the mayor and council further note that persons frequent such adult bookstores and video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
The mayor and council find that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The mayor and council therefore find that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in adult bookstores and video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The mayor and council find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in adult bookstores and video stores. The mayor and council further find that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this ordinance is hereby adopted. 
(2004-05-13, Added, 05/10/2004; 2001-09-04, Added, 09/05/2001) 
Section 4.3.2 - Regulations. 
(a)  Signs. No depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall be visible from outside the structure of an adult bookstore or video store or on signage outside the structure. 
(b)  Premises. Any adult bookstore or video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
(A)  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
(B)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the store is located. 
(C)  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
(D)  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleaned. 
(E)  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(c)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(d)  Video store. "Video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five (5) percent or more of its total space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall include adult video stores as defined in chapter 4, section 4.1.2. 
(e)  Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The city may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2004-05-13, Added, 05/10/2004; 2003-08-19, Amended, 08/18/2003, 4.5.2(d); 2001-09-04, Added, 09/05/2001) 
Article 4.4 - Massage Establishments 

Section 4.4.1 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Applicant: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity applying for a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage, or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
Employee: Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, including a massage therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
Massage: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity therefor. 
Massage establishment: Any commercial establishment having a source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage, as defined in this section, and which has fixed a place of business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or carries on any of the activities defined as "massage." 
Massage therapist: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Outcall massage service: Providing any of the services which constitute massage as defined above from or at any place or location other than a fixed place of business licensed as such under this chapter as a massage establishment. 
Patron: Any person over eighteen (18) years who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Physical therapist: A person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice physical therapy as defined by the O.C.G.A. § 43-33-3. 
Recognized school: An educational program or course of study of not less than five hundred (500) hours in duration which is accredited by the Commission on Massage Training Accreditation/Approval (COMTAA) or recognized by a state licensing agency such as the Nonpublic Post Secondary Education Commission of the State of Georgia. The curriculum of such program or course of study shall include, but not be limited to, massage theory and technique, anatomy and physiology. 
Sexual or genital area: Genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.2 - Regulatory Fee Certificate Requirements. 
(a)  A regulatory fee certificate to provide massage services is required for any person who will practice the art of massage as defined in this article. Such persons must be eighteen (18) years of age, a graduate of a recognized school as defined in this article or, if not a graduate, must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two (2) years under the direct supervision of a massage or physical therapist who would otherwise qualify for a license under this article. Additionally, such applicant must have received training and experience in areas which include but are not limited to the following: physical culture, anatomy, physiology, massage, hydro-therapy, electrotherapy, hygiene or health service management. The applicant in this instance must furnish with the application an affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the person(s) under whom his or her apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, providing the necessary requirements for qualification under this section. Further, the applicant must have successfully passed, the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork administered by the National Certification Examination Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork and be certified by such board or be certified by an agency which adheres to similar standards. 
(b)  A regulatory fee certificate is required for any person, firm, corporation or other entity operating a massage establishment. Such applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, employ one (1) or more massage therapists meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above, and if a corporation, is an officer of the corporation which is organized and authorized to do business pursuant to the laws of this state. The applicant to operate a massage establishment must be the owner of the premises wherein the business will be conducted or the holder of a lease thereon for the period to be covered by the certificate. 
(c)  An applicant must be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence for at least one (1) year prior to application. 
(d)  Therapists' certificates shall be good for a period of three (3) years and renewable upon verification that there has been no material change in applicant's status and applicant remains qualified under this article to hold such certificate. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.3 - Application Requirements; Investigation; Contents. 
In addition to the requirements contained in section 4.4.2, every applicant for a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage, or to maintain, operate or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the city upon a form provided by the code enforcement unit and pay a nonrefundable fee of $100.00. Copies of the application shall within five (5) days be referred to the chief building official, the city fire department, and the police department. These departments shall, within thirty (30) days, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the code enforcement unit concerning compliance with the codes of the city which they administer. The code enforcement unit shall also make an investigation of the applicant's character and qualifications. Each application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  A definition of service to be provided; 
(b)  The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(c)  The name and residence of each applicant; 
(1)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence address of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the establishment; 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment; 
(d)  The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant, including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(e)  Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age, including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(f)  Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex; 
(g)  Copy of identification such as driver's license and social security card, including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(h)  Any applicant for a regulatory fee certificate under this article is required to submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation, fingerprinting and a portrait photograph. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten (10) percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the certificate applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the certificate applied for, whether before or after the issuance of the certificate. Each applicant waives any rights which he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information, and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information. A certified check or money order in the amount charged by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation to cover the cost of fingerprint analysis and investigation shall be submitted with each application for a certificate. A $100.00 fee is to be submitted to the police department for a background check and photograph; 
(i)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, including stockholders and partners if applicable; 
(j)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city, county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(k)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted; 
(l)  The name and address of each massage therapist who is or will be employed in the establishment; 
(m)  The applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school as defined in this article; however, if the applicant will not engage in the practice of massage as defined herein, such applicant need not provide a diploma or certificate of graduation; 
(n)  The name and address of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in paragraph (3) where in the business or profession of massage is carried on; 
(o)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; 
(p)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(q)  The names, current addresses and written statements of at least three (3) bona fide permanent residents of the United States that the applicant is of good moral character. Preferably, the statement will first be furnished from residents of the city, then the county, then the state, and lastly from the rest of the United States. These references must be persons other than relatives and business associates. Upon completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of all foregoing information, the code enforcement unit shall accept the application for the necessary investigations; 
(r)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application; 
(s)  The holder of a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage or operate a massage establishment shall notify the code enforcement unit of each change in any data required to be furnished by this article within ten (10) days after such change occurs. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.4 - Inspections Authorized. 
The supervisor of code enforcement or his/her authorized representatives shall and the police may, from time to time, make inspections during regular business hours of each massage business establishment for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or licensee hereunder to fail to allow the inspection officer or police officer access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.5 - Operating Requirements; Unlawful Acts. 
(a)  The premises shall be kept clean, neat, and sanitary and shall comply with all sanitary and health requirements of the State of Georgia, Fulton County, and the City of Roswell. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or provided to customers on the premises. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a massage establishment between the hours of midnight and 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or her hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area, as defined in this article, of any person or to act in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to patronize any massage clinic unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage, a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or guardian. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any person or firm to provide "outcall" massage in any hotel, motel, rooming house or similar place offering short term lodging to the public. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment to knowingly cause, allow, or permit in or about such massage establishment any agent, employee or other person under his supervision or control to perform any acts prohibited under this section. 
(i)  It is specifically declared that any violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance, the same being subject to abatement in the municipal court of the city, as provided by charter. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. 
(j)  Any provision of state law notwithstanding, a violation of the provisions of this article shall be further punishable as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.6 - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(a)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, and physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state. 
(b)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of the state. 
(c)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes. 
(d)  Physical therapists licensed under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.7 - Posting of Regulatory Fee Certificate; Transfer of Regulatory Fee Certificate. 
(a)  Every person obtaining a regulatory fee certificate under this chapter shall display such certificate in a prominent place. 
(b)  No regulatory fee certificate whether for a massage establishment or a massage therapist shall be transferable or assignable from person to person or from location to location. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.8 - Revocation or Suspension of Regulatory Fee Certificate. 
A regulatory fee certificate granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation. Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor and council, there is cause to revoke this certificate, a written notice of intention to revoke the certificate shall be furnished to the holder thereof. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the applicant may present his/her case before the mayor and council. After the hearing, the mayor and council may revoke this certificate if, in their discretion, revocation is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(a)  The regulatory fee certificate of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds (but is not limited to such grounds): 
(1)  The applicant is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in obtaining a regulatory fee certificate to practice massage therapy; 
(2)  The applicant is engaged in the practice of massage therapy under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The applicant is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his or her duties; 
(4)  The applicant is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices; 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of lascivious nature; 
(6)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(7)  Noncompliance with any section of this article; 
(8)  Any violation of state or local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The regulatory fee certificate of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds (but is not limited to such grounds): 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The applicant is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage therapist and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in said establishment; 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county, or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the building codes; 
(5)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The applicant or any of his employees or agents has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or to any charge of a lascivious nature; 
(7)  The applicant or his employees have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article; 
(8)  Failure of the applicant to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers, and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety, and well-being of the general public and the customers; 
(c)  Any massage therapist or massage establishment operator who has his or her or its regulatory fee certificate revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a certificate for twelve (12) months immediately following revocation. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.9 - Responsibility of Owner or Operator. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of any service described herein as "massage" to insure that each person employed as a masseuse shall have in his or her possession a valid permit. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.10 - Record of Treatment to be Kept. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person administering this treatment. These records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the City of Roswell Code Enforcement Office and Police Department. Records shall be kept for a minimum of three (3) years. 
(b)  No massage therapy shall be performed by any massage practitioner in the home of any client or in any place except for the place of business of a licensee hereunder, unless a written memorandum is first made in a log or record kept at the place of business for the purpose of recording consecutively the date, time of treatment, place of treatment, name and address of person to receive treatment, type of treatment to be received, name of person to render treatment, time the practitioner leaves to render treatment, and the fee charged. The practitioner shall record the time each treatment was completed immediately upon his return to the place of business. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.4.11 - Compliance. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or firm to engage in, conduct or carry on within the city, any business as a massage establishment or to act as a massage technician without first obtaining and possessing a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or without complying with all regulations contained in this chapter. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Article 4.5 - Escort Services 

Section 4.5.1 - Escort Services; Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means money or money's worth. 
Escort means any person who, for monetary consideration in the form of a fee, commission, or salary, is held out to the public as available for hire or consort with or to accompany another to other's social affairs, places of amusement or entertainment, within any place or public resort, or within any private quarters. 
Escort bureau means any person who for a fee, commission, profit, payment or other monetary consideration, furnishes, refers, or offers to furnish or refer escorts, or provide, or offers to introduce patrons to escorts. 
Escort bureau runner means any person, not an escort, who, for a salary, fee, hire, reward, or profit, as the agent for either an escort bureau or a patron, contacts or meets with the escort or patrons or escort bureaus at any location other than the established open office, whether that person is employed by the escort bureau or any business, or is self-employed. 
Licensee is a person who is the holder of a valid license under this article. A licensee includes an agent, servant, employee, or other such person while acting on behalf of that licensee whenever such licensee is or would be prohibited from doing or performing an act or acts under this article. 
Offer to provide acts of sexual conduct means to offer, propose, or solicit to provide sexual conduct to a patron. Such definitions include all conversations, advertisements and acts which would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that acts were to be provided. 
Open office means an office at a licensed escort bureau address from which escort business is transacted. To qualify as an open office it is required that: 
(a)  Business hours be established and posted and that the office be open to the public and patrons or prospective patrons during such business hours and that the office be accessible to business invitees, business license officials and law enforcement officers through a security system during all other hours that escorts are working. 
(b)  The office be managed by the owner or a management employee of the owner having authority to bind the bureau to escort and patron contracts and adjust patron and consumer complaints. 
(c)  All telephone lines and numbers listed to the escort bureau or advertised as escort bureau numbers terminate at the open office and at no other location. 
(d)  An index of all employees and escorts be kept in the open office. 
(e)  All business records be kept in the open office, including records of escort calls and referrals, stating the name and address, including hotel or motel room, of the patron, the date and time of the referral, name of the escort sent, and whether the referral resulted in an escort service and the total fee received from the patron, if any. 
Person financially interested means , for a corporation, any person who is an officer or director or any shareholder holding more than five (5) percent of the shares thereof; for a noncorporation business, any person who shares in any financial gain attributable to the business as a proprietor or owner or on the basis of a percentage in excess of five (5) percent of gross or ten (10) percent of net revenue. 
Service-oriented escort means an escort who: 
(a)  Operates from an open office; 
(b)  Does not employ or use an escort runner; 
(c)  Does not advertise that sexual conduct will be provided or work for an escort bureau which so advertises; and 
(d)  Does not offer, solicit, agree to provide or provide sexual conduct. 
Service-oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which: 
(a)  Maintains an open office at an established place of business; 
(b)  Does not use an escort bureau runner; 
(c)  Does not advertise, offer, solicit, agree to, or provide sexual conduct to a patron; and 
(d)  Employs or provides only escorts who possess escort identification cards. 
Sexual conduct means engaging in or the commission of an act of sexual intercourse, oral/genital conduct, or the touching of the sexual organs, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts of a person for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire of another person. 
Sexual gratification means sexual conduct. 
Sexual stimulation means to excite or arouse the prurient interests or to offer or solicit acts of sexual conduct. 
Sexually oriented escort is an escort who: 
(a)  Employs an escort bureau runner as an employee, agent, or independent contractor; 
(b)  Works for, as an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by a sexually oriented escort bureau; 
(c)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or works for an agent, employee or independent contractor, or is referred to a patron by an escort bureau which so advertises; 
(d)  Solicits, offers, agrees to provide, or does provide, acts of sexual conduct to an escort patron; or 
(e)  Accepts an offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee in addition to the fee charged by the escort bureau. 
Sexually oriented escort bureau means an escort bureau which: 
(a)  Engages in advertising to make the prospective patron believe the acts of sexual conduct or sexual stimulation will be provided; 
(b)  Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution; 
(c)  Does not maintain an open office; 
(d)  Employs as an employee, agent, or independent contractor, or uses an escort bureau runner; 
(e)  Advertises that sexual conduct will be provided or that escorts which provide such sexual conduct will be provided, referred, or introduced to a patron; 
(f)  Solicits, offers, or agrees to provide, or does provide acts of sexual conduct to a patron; 
(g)  Employs, contracts with, or provides or refers escorts who do not possess escort identification cards as required in this article; 
(h)  Does not deliver contracts to every patron or customer; or 
(i)  Employs, contracts with, or refers or provides to a patron a sexually oriented escort. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.2 - Activity Restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as an escort within the city unless employed by a licensed escort bureau or licensed as an escort bureau. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as a sexually oriented escort, regardless of license. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.3 - Identification Cards. 
(a)  Each escort bureau licensee shall be issued identification cards in this name and the name of each person who shall engage in the activity of an escort on its behalf. This card shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A photograph of the escort; 
(2)  The escort's name, address and social security number; 
(3)  The escort's date of birth, height, weight and gender. 
(b)  The card must be carried on the person of an individual while such person is engaged in the activity of an escort within the City of Roswell. Such identification card shall be displayed upon request of any police officer or other law enforcement official. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.4 - Contract Required. 
The escort bureau shall provide to each patron a written contract and receipt of payment for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount of money such services shall cost to the patron, and any special terms or conditions related to the services to be performed. Such contract shall contain the following language: 
Any person who disrobes and shows his or her private parts or any female who disrobes and exposes her breasts while participating in any of the activities which this establishment offers for hire violates article 4.3 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.5 - Office Required, Restrictions. 
The escort bureau shall maintain an open office at the licensed location. The address of that office shall be included in all patron contracts and public advertisements. Private rooms or booths where the patron may meet with an escort shall not be provided in the open office or at any other location by the escort bureau. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.6 - Liability of Bureau. 
The escort bureau, in terms of licensing consequences, is responsible and liable for the acts of all its employees and subcontractors, including, but not limited to, telephone receptionists and escorts who are referred by that bureau, while the escort is with the patron. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.7 - Advertising. 
It is unlawful in the City of Roswell to advertise or hold out to the public the availability of an escort bureau without obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article, whether the actual business of escorts or escort bureaus are performed. The escort bureau license number must be prominently displayed in all advertisements. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.8 - Service for Minors. 
It is unlawful for a licensee to provide escort services to individuals under eighteen (18) years of age unless written authorization by a parent or legal guardian is issued to the escort when acting as such. The escort bureau must keep a copy of any such written authorization from a parent or guardian on file in the escort bureau's open office. Such written authorization must include the parent or guardian's name, address, social security number, phone number, and signature. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.9 - Reserved. 
Section 4.5.10 - License Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, manage, operate, or maintain an escort bureau unless licensed pursuant to this division. It shall also be unlawful for any person to work or perform services as, conduct, operate, manage, or maintain a sexually oriented escort bureau, regardless of license. A separate license is required for each location or type of activity coming under this article within the city 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.11 - Application. 
(a)  An applicant for an escort bureau license shall file an application as required by section 4.1.11, accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. 
(b)  The application shall contain in addition to the information required by section 4.1.11 the following: 
(1)  A description of any service to be provided, together with a declaration that the services to be provided shall not involve those of a sexually oriented escort bureau. 
(2)  The names and residential addresses of all persons employed as escorts. 
(3)  A copy of the contract for services to be provided to customers or clients of the bureau. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.12 - Information Update. 
Any changes in information required to be submitted by this division must be given to the general government administration department within ten (10) days of any such change. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.13 - Investigation. 
The city police department shall have a reasonable period of time in which to investigate the application for a license under this division through various city departments. Such reasonable period shall not exceed thirty (30) days. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.14 - Conditions for Issuance. 
(a)  The administration department shall grant a license under this article on the following circumstances: 
(1)  Required fees have been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not made any material misrepresentation of fact on the application. 
(4)  That neither the applicant, if an individual; nor any person financially interested, if a corporation; nor any of the partners, including limited partners; nor the holder of any profit interest; nor the manager or other principal in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed escort bureau; nor any individual employed or contracted with to be an escort or to provide escort services has been convicted of, pleaded nolo contendere or guilty to any felony, or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within ten (10) years prior to the issuance of the license. 
(5)  The applicant has not had a license similar to the one issued pursuant to the provisions of this division issued by another local authority, suspended or revoked within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application. 
(6)  The escort bureau complies with all applicable city, county, state and federal laws. 
(7)  The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(b)  The administration department shall deny the license application if all the requirements set forth in this section have not been met. Upon denial, the applicant shall be notified by mail of the denial and reasons thereof. The applicant may appeal such denial as specified in section 4.1.19. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.15 - Fees. 
The fee for a license required by this division, and for a renewal thereof, and for each escort, shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the administration department. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.16 - Duration. 
Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the same was issued. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.17 - Transfer. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this division are personal and nontransferable. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.18 - Renewal. 
Licensees should contact the general government administration department on or before December 15 of each year for renewal scheduling. In order to have his license renewed, an escort must show that he is currently licensed in good standing with the city. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Section 4.5.19 - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  The licensee, any employee, agent, or other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder, or manager, or any person financially interested, has violated the provisions of this article in conducting an activity licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The licensee, any employee, agent or other person connected or associated with the licensee as a partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager or any person financially interested, has made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for any license required by this article. 
(3)  The licensee has been convicted, subsequent to the issuance of any license, of a crime which is either a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or has offered or agreed to or rendered the service of a sexually oriented escort. 
(4)  The licensee has violated a provision of this article in conducting a licensed activity pursuant to this article. 
(5)  The licensee is a corporation that is no longer qualified to transact business in the state or is no longer in good standing. 
(6)  To revoke a license, the City of Roswell code enforcement office shall notify the licensee in writing by mail at the address as shown on the application or otherwise as most recently of record that such license or permit is revoked. The cause for such revocation shall be set forth in the notice. Service shall be complete upon mailing to the address of record. 
(7)  The license shall terminate if the licensee fails to pay any license fee owed either when due or by the end of any renewal period. 
(8)  Licensee may appeal any revocation of its license to mayor and council within thirty (30) days of notice of revocation. 
(2004-05-13, Amended, 05/10/2004) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION 
Article 5.1 - In General 

Section 5.1.1 - Purpose and Scope. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate building and construction in the City of Roswell, to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes and to establish procedures for the permitting and inspection of buildings within the City of Roswell. 
Section 5.1.2 - Chief Building Official. 
There is hereby created the position of chief building official who shall administer the provisions of this chapter and have the powers, duties and responsibilities described herein and as stated in the state minimum codes. The chief building official shall serve as the "building official" of the City of Roswell as such term is used in the state minimum codes, and shall enforce and interpret the building and technical codes adopted by this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city from contracting with a qualified professional or professionals to perform the duties, administration and responsibilities of the chief or assistant building official(s) of the city and such professional(s) shall have full power and authority under this chapter and as stated in the state minimum codes to perform all duties therein. 
(2012-07-10, § 1, Amended, 07/09/2012) 
Section 5.1.3 - Supervision. 
The chief building official shall be retained by, report to and work under the direct supervision of the director of community development. The director of community development with the approval of the city administrator may hire qualified assistant building official(s) as is required or necessary to properly enforce the building and technical codes. 
(2012-07-10, § 2, Amended, 07/09/2012) 
Section 5.1.4 - Code Remedial. 
The codes referenced in this chapter are hereby declared to be remedial. They shall be construed to protect public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
Section 5.1.5 - Federal and State Authority. 
The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders. 
Section 5.1.6 - Maintenance. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing, systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
Section 5.1.7 - Restrictions on City Employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the building department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work that is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
Section 5.1.8 - Liability. 
(a)  The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither The City of Roswell nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(b)  Any City of Roswell official or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city attorney or such attorneys as he may appoint until the final termination of the proceedings. 
Section 5.1.9 - Records. 
The chief building inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 5.1.10 - Reports. 
The chief building inspector shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
Sections 5.1.11, 5.1.12 - Reserved. 
Section 5.1.13 - Construction Activities Restricted to Certain Hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct any activity in the construction of any building or structure, the moving of earth, or the laying of any pavement, including, but not limited to, the making of any excavation, clearing or grading of surface land, and loading or unloading material, equipment, or supplies, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless a permit for each work at different hours or days has first been issued by the chief building inspector. Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the chief building inspector and shall state the name of the applicant, his business address, the location of the proposed work, the reason for seeking a permit to do such work on Sunday or between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and the estimated time of the proposed operation. No such special permit shall be issued except where the public peace, health, or welfare will not be adversely affected by such issuance or will be harmed by failure to perform the work at the times indicated. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any person performing construction activity at his or her residence, but such persons are subject to the noise restrictions set out in subsection 8.8.3(s) of this Code. 
(2009-12-21, § 1, Amended, 12/21/2009) 
Article 5.3 - Building and Technical Codes 

Section 5.3.1 - Building and Technical Codes—Adoption by Reference. 
(a)  The following technical and building codes, including the latest edition of each as adopted and amended the latest editions of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, adopted by reference and shall be enforced in the City of Roswell: 
(1)  International Building Code 
(2)  National Electrical Code 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code 
(4)  International Mechanical Code 
(5)  International Plumbing Code 
(6)  International Residential Code 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code 
(8)  International Fire Code 
(9)  International Residential Code, Appendix G 
(10)  International Existing Building Code 
(11)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code 
(12)  International Property Maintenance Code 
(13)  National Green Building Standards—Voluntary for those applicants seeking green certification 
(14)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code 
(b)  The codes listed in subsection (a) of this section shall mean such codes as they exist, provided that any such code may hereafter be amended as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9). 
(c)  Any matters in any standard code adopted by this section which are contrary to or inconsistent with any existing ordinance of the City of Roswell shall prevail over such ordinance and such ordinance shall stand repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specified, when the standard codes refer to the duties of certain officials named therein, the official of the City of Roswell who has duties corresponding to those of the named individual in such standard code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such standard code. 
( 2017-04-04 , § 1, Amended 04/24/2017; Ord. No. 2013-04-02, § 1, Amended, 4/22/2013; 2012-08-13, § 1, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.2 - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building, or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(d)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(e)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(f)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(g)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(h)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating, and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(i)  One- and two-family dwelling. The provisions of the International Residential Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(j)  The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(2012-08-13, § 2, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.3 - Standard Building Code—Appendix. 
The City of Roswell hereby adopts Appendix G of the International Residential Code. Such standards and schedules shall be enforced in their entirety unless expressly modified in this chapter. 
(2012-08-13, § 3, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.4 - Referenced Standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
Section 5.3.5 - Existing Buildings. 
(a)  Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing, structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes. Any such alteration, repair or rehabilitation work must conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The chief building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the chief building official. 
(2012-08-13, § 4, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.6 - Historic Structures. 
In addition to those provisions contained within the Standard Building Code, the following restrictions shall govern moving, demolition, or alteration of historic structures and shall be considered an amendment to section 101.5 of the Standard Building Code: 
No structure of any type may be moved into a historic district until the provisions of Unified Development Code (UDC) Section 13.7, as amended, have been complied with. Further, no structure within an historic Roswell district may be erected, demolished, removed wholly and/or in part nor the exterior architectural character of such structure be altered until referenced Unified Development Code (UDC) Section 13.7 has been complied with. All structures and/or buildings that are moved into the City of Roswell must be inspected and approved by the chief building inspector or his representative before the structure and/or building is moved into the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2012-08-13, § 5, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Sections 5.3.7, 5.3.8 - Reserved. 
Section 5.3.9 - Codes—Administration and Enforcement. 
The building code shall be administered and enforced by the chief building official of the City of Roswell and his assistants. The chief building official shall have general charge and supervision of all building construction in the city and the inspector, through himself and his designated representatives, shall require all contractors and builders to conform to such code. 
(2012-08-13, § 6, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.10 - Unsafe Buildings or Systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
Section 5.3.11 - Requirements not Covered by Code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing, or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the chief building official. 
(2012-08-13, § 7, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.3.12 - Alternate Materials and Methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the chief building official. The chief building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the chief building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The chief building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(2012-08-13, § 8, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Article 5.4 - Permits and Inspections 

Section 5.4.1 - When Permit Required. 
Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing, system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, shall first make application to the chief building inspector and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Section 5.4.2 - Work Authorized. 
A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
Section 5.4.3 - Minor Repairs. 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the chief building inspector without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
Section 5.4.4 - Information Required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the chief building inspector on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The owner, or his authorized agent shall sign the application. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.5 - Time Limitations. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. The chief building inspector may allow one (1) or more extensions of time for periods of not more than ninety (90) days each provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
Section 5.4.6 - Reserved. 
Section 5.4.7 - Drawings and Specifications; Requirements. 
When required by the chief building inspector, two (2) or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
Section 5.4.8 - Additional Data. 
The chief building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the chief building inspector to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
Section 5.4.9 - Design Professional. 
The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
1.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
2.  Buildings and structures three (3) stories or more high. 
3.  Buildings and structures five thousand (5,000) square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, with the exception of single-family dwellings, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Section 5.4.10 - Structural and Fire Resistance Integrity. 
Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems. Also, plans should indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
Section 5.4.11 - Site Drawings. 
Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The chief building inspector may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
Sections 5.4.12, 5.4.13 - Reserved. 
Section 5.4.14 - Hazardous Occupancies. 
The following provisions and prohibitions are required when a structure's use is hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(a)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(b)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous material storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Construction near or on a lot containing a billboard, pylon sign or off-premises sign. Construction of any structure, building, or appurtenance adjacent to, or on a lot containing a billboard, pylon sign or off-premises sign under the provisions of this section shall require that: 
1.  No buildings, structures, parking or appurtenances may be constructed within the "fall zone" of such sign, except that when the fall zone extends beyond the property line of the parcel on which the billboard, pylon or sign is located, then buildings, structures, parking and appurtenances shall not be restricted on the adjacent property. A "fall zone" is defined as an area equal to one hundred (100) percent of the height of the sign in every direction. 
2.  No subdivision of a parcel containing a billboard shall be permitted unless the subdivided lot containing the billboard is large enough to encompass the "fall zone" of such billboard. 
3.  For purposes of this ordinance a billboard shall be defined as any sign greater than twelve (12) feet in height as measured from the ground at the base of the sign. Such billboards shall be considered to be the principal use of such parcel. 
4.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a parcel containing a billboard on or before December 7, 2009 or the date of adoption of this ordinance [December 14, 2009], whichever is later, provided such billboard is a nonconforming use and was established pursuant to a recorded irrevocable permanent ownership interest in a dominant estate (not a lease) and the proposed construction of the structure, building or appurtenance shall occur on the servient estate. The owner of such parcel, prior to issuance of a land disturbance permit, shall file a binding covenant that shall run with the land in the Superior Court of Fulton County declaring that should the occasion or opportunity ever arise in the future to have the billboard use ended or removed, either by law, equity or contract, regardless of cost, the billboard shall be permanently removed from the parcel. 
(2009-12-18, § 1(Exh. A), Amended, 12/14/2009; 2003-06-15, Added, 06/16/2003, Subsection (c)) 
Section 5.4.15 - Plan Review. 
The chief building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Section 5.4.16 - Affidavits. 
The chief building inspector may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement. If accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, the affidavit shall include a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The chief building inspector may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the chief building inspector, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed. Upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems the design professional shall submit a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the chief building inspector relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Section 5.4.17 - Action on Permits. 
The chief building inspector shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the chief building inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
Section 5.4.18 - Refusal to Issue Permit. 
If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the chief building inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
Section 5.4.19 - Special Foundation Permit. 
When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and is pending, the chief building inspector may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
Section 5.4.20 - Public Right-of-Way. 
A permit shall not be given by the chief building inspector for the construction or alteration of any building where the construction planned will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building. Such restriction shall also apply to any building or structure removed from another lot or premises. It shall be the duty of the chief building inspector to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the Standard Building Code. 
Sections 5.4.21, 5.4.22 - Reserved. 
Section 5.4.23 - Contractors' Responsibilities; Licensure. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with its license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
All persons, firms or corporations performing any work regulated by this chapter or contracting for such work in the City of Roswell shall have a valid, current City of Roswell business license. A business license shall not be issued to do electrical, mechanical or plumbing work or contracting in the City of Roswell unless the person applying for the license holds a valid current license from the State of Georgia. If the applicant for a business license is a firm or corporation, it must have in its employ a full-time person who has a license from the State of Georgia. Should the State of Georgia revoke this license, the City of Roswell permit will be automatically revoked. All state licenses must be current. 
Section 5.4.24 - Permit Intent. 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes. Issuance of a permit shall not prevent the chief building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time the work is commenced. One (1) or more extensions of time, for periods not more than ninety (90) days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.25 - Permit Issued on Basis of an Affidavit. 
Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the chief building inspector, are hazardous or complex, the chief building inspector shall require that design professionals supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the chief building inspector written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.26 - Plans. 
When the chief building inspector issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." The chief building inspector shall retain one (1) set of drawings so reviewed and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the chief building inspector or his authorized representative. 
Section 5.4.27 - Prescribed Fees. 
A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc. has been paid. 
Section 5.4.28 - Work Commencing before Permit Issuance. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
Section 5.4.29 - Accounting. 
The chief building inspector shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
Section 5.4.30 - Schedule of Permit Fees. 
On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body and maintained by the community development department. 
Section 5.4.31 - Building Permit Valuations. 
If, in the opinion of the chief building inspector, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the chief building inspector. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
Section 5.4.32 - Posting of Permit. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the chief building inspector or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.33 - Revocation of Permits; Misrepresentation. 
The chief building inspector may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
Section 5.4.34 - Violation of Code Provisions. 
The chief building inspector may revoke a permit upon a finding that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
Section 5.4.35 - Existing-Building Inspections. 
Before issuing a permit the chief building inspector may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
Section 5.4.36 - Manufacturers and Fabricators. 
When deemed necessary by the chief building inspector he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
Section 5.4.37 - Inspection Service. 
The chief building inspector may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by section 5.4.39. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
Section 5.4.38 - Inspections Prior to Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. 
The chief building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required. A final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
Section 5.4.39 - Required Inspections. 
The chief building inspector upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(a)  Building: 
(1)  Footing/Foundation/Foundation Wall Inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated, the reinforcement in place, and the forms erected, prior to the placing of concrete. 
(2)  Slab/Monolithic Slab Inspection: To be made prior to the placing of concrete. 
(3)  Frame Inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing, are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
(4)  Moisture Barrier Inspection: To be made prior to the installation of the exterior finish material. 
(5)  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(b)  Electrical: 
(1)  Temporary Pole: To be made after the temporary power pole has been placed, properly grounded and ready to be energized. 
(2)  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(3)  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling-membranes. 
(4)  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(c)  Plumbing: 
(1)  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Required Tests: Tests performed as required by code. 
(d)  Mechanical: 
(1)  Underground Inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-In Inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final Inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(e)  Gas: 
(1)  Rough Piping Inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
(2)  Final Piping Inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
(3)  Final Inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(f)  Energy: 
(1)  Foundation Inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
(2)  Frame Inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
(3)  Final Inspection : To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. A completed energy code compliance certificate shall be installed in or near the electrical panel as required by code. 
(2012-08-13, § 9, Amended, 08/27/2012) 
Section 5.4.40 - Inspection Fees. 
The chief building inspector shall maintain a schedule of fees applicable to inspections required under the electrical, mechanical, plumbing or gas codes. Such fees shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Section 5.4.41 - Written Releases. 
Work shall not be done on any part of a building structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the chief building inspector. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
Section 5.4.42 - Reinforcing Steel, Structural Frames, Insulation, Plumbing, Mechanical, or Electrical Systems. 
Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.43 - Plaster Fire Protection. 
In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the chief building inspector after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the chief building inspector has been received. 
Section 5.4.44 - Right of Entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the chief building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the chief building inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the chief building inspector by these technical codes. If such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the chief building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the chief building inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the chief building inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
Section 5.4.45 - Stop Work Orders. 
Upon notice from the chief building inspector, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists because the work done is so inferior as to pose an immediate threat to health, safety and public welfare, the chief building inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
Section 5.4.46 - Certificate of Occupancy. 
A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the chief building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the chief building inspector. 
Section 5.4.47 - Same—Issuing. 
Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the chief building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
Section 5.4.48 - Temporary/Partial Occupancy. 
A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building that may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
Section 5.4.49 - Existing Building Certificate of Occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the chief building inspector and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the chief building inspector, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
Section 5.4.50 - Certificate of Completion. 
Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Section 5.4.51 - Connection of Service Utilities. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building, or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the chief building inspector and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
Section 5.4.52 - Temporary Connection. 
The chief building inspector may authorize the temporary connection of the building, or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Section 5.4.53 - Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. 
The chief building inspector shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The chief building inspector shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
Section 5.4.54 - Posting on Construction Sites. 
Prior to commencing any land disturbance activities on a construction site for which a permit has been issued, the party to whom the permit has been issued is required to post on such site, in a conspicuous place, a sign which contains the following information: 
(a)  The name, address and phone number of the party responsible for the project; 
(b)  The property owner's name, address and phone number; 
(c)  The name and phone numbers of the city code enforcement personnel to whom code violations can be reported. 
Failure to abide by such posting requirement shall be a violation of this article and may result in a stop work order being issued in addition to any penalties specified in this article or section 1.1.3 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Section 5.4.55 - Floor Loads. 
An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The chief building inspector may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
Section 5.4.56 - Storage and Factory—Industrial Occupancies. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
Section 5.4.57 - Posting Required. 
In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the chief building inspector on the plans, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building, in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
Article 5.5 - Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals 

Section 5.5.1 - Creation of Board. 
There is hereby created the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals, which board shall have the power to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the chief building inspector and consider variances of the technical codes as described in chapter 1, section 108 of the Standard Building Code. Appointments to such board shall be made as directed by the City of Roswell ordinance relating to boards and commissions. Board members shall be subject to the City of Roswell Code of Ethics, Article 2.5. 
Section 5.5.2 - Secretary of Board. 
The chief building inspector shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
Section 5.5.3 - Powers. 
The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power, as further defined in article 5.4, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the chief building inspector and consider variances of the technical codes. 
Section 5.5.4 - Grounds for Appeal. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the chief building inspector to the Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals whenever any one (1) of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The chief building inspector rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
Section 5.5.5 - Variances. 
The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or other technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service systems. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
Section 5.5.6 - Notice of Appeal. 
Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision is rendered by the chief building inspector. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the chief building inspector. A fee of $50.00 shall accompany such notice of appeal. 
Section 5.5.7 - Unsafe or Dangerous Buildings or Service Systems. 
In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the chief building inspector, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the chief building inspector may, in his decision, limit the time for such notice of appeal to a shorter period. 
Section 5.5.8 - Decisions. 
The Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the Board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the chief building inspector or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the chief building inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the chief building inspector for two (2) weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final; subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
Article 5.7 - Land Clearing and Solid Waste Disposal 

Section 5.7.1 - Construction Material. 
No person shall bury unused, scrap, waste, excess, or discarded construction material. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Section 5.7.2 - Open Burning. 
Open burning for land clearing purposes is prohibited. Open burning in connection with a construction project is allowed under the following circumstances and conditions: 
(a)  Warming fires in barrels of fifty-five-gallon capacity or less are allowed, provided that the outside temperature is fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or less and the fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors. Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance allowed in a warming fire. Warming fires must be attended and are authorized only at sites where no certificate of occupancy has been issued. It is specifically declared the responsibility of all city building inspectors and other enforcement personnel to assist the fire marshal in the regulation and enforcement of these warming fire provisions. No permit or fee is required for warming fires; and, 
(b)  Burning under hazardous conditions. The fire marshal may prohibit any open burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such burning hazardous. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the liability of the landowner or contractor for any damages caused as a result of fire. 
Article 5.8 - Temporary Structures 

Section 5.8.1 - Applicability. 
The term temporary structures, as used herein, refers to construction sheds, trailers, manufactured housing, modular units and portable classrooms whether such structures are freestanding or permanently affixed to a foundation. The use of any temporary structure as defined herein whether for educational, religious, or commercial purposes shall require the issuance of a permit pursuant to the conditions stated herein, subject to the following exceptions: 
(a)  Construction trailers. Temporary structures used by builders, architects, and construction crews during construction are allowed, provided such structures are removed prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. A special building permit shall be issued prior to the erection of any temporary structure used for construction purposes. 
(b)  Sales or leasing offices. Temporary structures used as sales or leasing offices for new construction may be maintained on-site until the last unit, lot, or parcel in such development is sold. 
Section 5.8.2 - Permits. 
A temporary structures permit may be granted upon application to a religious, educational, licensed business or other organization for a period not to exceed two (2) years to temporarily place and use not more than two (2) trailers, mobile homes, manufactured houses, portable classrooms or modular units not to exceed nine hundred (900) square feet each where the following described conditions are present: 
(a)  The applicant has an immediate need for additional space in an existing facility to continue providing services to its members, students or customers. 
(b)  The applicant has a capital improvements project underway designed to alleviate the need for additional space. 
(c)  For projects exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet of building area: 
(1)  Approval from the Design Review Board has been received; 
(2)  Engineering plans have been completed and a development permit has been issued; 
(3)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the funds necessary to complete the improvements have been raised or are presently available to the organization as attested to by the applicant with appropriate supporting documentation; and 
(4)  The information submitted shows that financing commitments necessary to complete the project on a timely basis will be procured by the organization. 
(d)  For projects not exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet of building area: 
(1)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the funds necessary to complete the improvements have been raised or are presently available to the organization as attested to by the applicant with appropriate supporting documentation; and 
(2)  The information submitted shows that financing commitments necessary to complete the project on a timely basis will be procured by the organization; and 
(3)  A development permit is applied for within six (6) months of application for the temporary structures permit. 
(e)  All structures shall comply with existing building codes, landscaping requirements, and the provisions of the Roswell Code of Ordinances. In addition, each temporary structure shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjoining property lines. 
Section 5.8.3 - Permit Issuance. 
Before the issuance of any permit under this section by the chief building inspector, the zoning director shall certify that the development permit is ready for issuance. For those projects not to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of building area, a conditional permit not to exceed six (6) months may be issued by the chief building inspector pending submission of engineering plans and subsequent issuance of the development permit. At that time, the temporary structures permit may be renewed by the chief building inspector for an additional eighteen (18) months pending compliance with requirements (1)—(4) in subsection 5.8.2(c) above. 
Section 5.8.4 - Nonconforming Uses. 
Upon notice from the City of Roswell of noncompliance with this ordinance, all trailers, mobile homes, manufactured houses, or modular units presently in use for residential or other purposes as stated herein shall within one hundred eighty (180) days be brought into compliance with these provisions. Notwithstanding the failure of the city to give notice of noncompliance, those uses not recognized by this ordinance shall be deemed to be operating in noncompliance with this ordinance and the structures will be removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of adoption of this ordinance or upon expiration of any existing permit whichever is sooner. 
Section 5.8.5 - Permit Expiration. 
All temporary structures for other than residential purposes shall be removed within ten days of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or upon expiration of the development permit issued for the subject property. Permits may be renewed once for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days upon application to the chief building inspector made not later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the existing permit upon the following showing: 
(a)  The development permit for the subject property is extended; 
(b)  The capital improvements contemplated at the time the initial permit was issued are no less than seventy-five (75) percent complete; 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy can be issued within ninety (90) days; and 
(d)  Any delay in completion of the project is not due to acts or omissions of the permit holder. 
The requirements of this provision shall be strictly enforced. The decision of the chief building inspector as to issuance of the temporary structure permit and as to renewal shall be final. 
Article 5.9 - Trenching 

Section 5.9.1 - Definitions. 
Excavation means any manmade cavity or depression in the earth's surface, including its sides, walls, or faces, formed by earth removal and producing unsupported earth conditions as results of the excavation. If installed forms or similar structures reduce the depth to width relationship, an excavation may become a trench. 
OSHA means the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or successor agency. 
Supervisory personnel means any person who has the responsibility for layout, oversight, superintending, directing or controlling an excavation or trench. 
Trench is a narrow excavation made below the surface of the ground. In general, the depth is greater than the width, but the width of the trench is not greater than fifteen (15) feet. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.2 - Prohibition. 
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of any kind whatsoever shall engage in any excavation or trenching except in the compliance with the provisions of this article and in compliance with any applicable laws of the State of Georgia or of the United States or any rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or any other state or federal governmental entity or department promulgating rules and regulations applicable to excavating and trenching. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.3 - Adoption of OSHA Safety and Health Regulations. 
All safety and health regulations adopted by OSHA with regard to excavating and trenching operations, particularly Part 1926, Subpart P-Excavations, Trenching, and Shoring, Sections 1926.650, 1926.651, 1926.652, 1926.653 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended are adopted as a part of this article the same as if quoted verbatim herein. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.4 - Certificate Required. 
a.  No equipment operator or supervisory personnel shall participate in any excavation or trenching or in any way work in an excavation or trench unless such person holds a valid certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of a required educational program on safe trench/excavation practices. No other person shall participate in or work in any excavation or trenching site unless a certificate holder is present at the excavation or trench site where work is being performed. 
b.  In the event any person who holds a valid certificate from the City of Roswell is found to be in violation of the safety standards or requirements on any job site, the certificate may be revoked after notice and hearing as herein provided. In the event of revocation, the certificate may be reinstalled one time upon repeat by the person of the educational program required for issuance of the initial certificate. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.5 - Permit Required. 
a.  No excavation or trenching shall be performed until a permit or authorization for same has been obtained from the City of Roswell. Any applicant will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of safety requirements before any permit will be issued. All such permits shall be conspicuously posted upon the job site. 
b.  No permit or authorization shall be issued unless an authorized agent of the applicant holds a certificate. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.6 - Inspection. 
The City of Roswell shall periodically inspect trench excavation sites. Such inspectors shall, among other things, verify the presence of the required permit, verify existence of required certificates, and verify compliance to OSHA safety standards hereinabove adopted. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.7 - Violations. 
a.  Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any certificate issued hereunder. 
b.  Violations of this article may result in revocation or suspension of any permit issued hereunder as hereinabove set out. 
c.  A notice of violation shall be issued for any deficiency. Upon receipt of such notice, the deficiency shall be corrected immediately. 
d.  All excavating and trenching work upon any job site shall cease immediately when there is trench activity by any person not a certificate holder and/or when the deficiencies cannot be corrected immediately and/or when such work is being done without a permit. 
e.  If deficiencies identified in a notice of violation are not corrected, the building permit, land disturbance permit or any other permit issued by the City of Roswell may be suspended or revoked for due cause upon the conditions herein identified for revocation of permit. 
f.  Flagrant and/or repeated violations shall be reported by the City of Roswell to OSHA for action by that agency. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Section 5.9.8 - Appeals. 
Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal such suspension or revocation by filing a written notice for appeal with the zoning director. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the council shall be final. 
(2002-11-01, Added, 11/04/2002) 
Chapter 6 - ELECTIONS 
Article 6.1 - In General 

Section 6.1.1 - Applicability of General Law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2, Title 21 of the "Official Code of Georgia Annotated" (O.C.G.A.), "Elections and Primaries Generally," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 6.1.2 - Regular Elections. 
All general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each year. Terms of offices shall be as set forth in the City Charter at section 2.04. 
Section 6.1.3 - Special Elections. 
Special elections held as needed according to the City Charter Section 2.08 shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 21, Chapter 2, Title 21. 
Article 6.2 - Qualification of Candidates 

Section 6.2.1 - Residency Requirement. 
The candidate must be a registered voter in this jurisdiction and must have been a resident of the city for one (1) year prior to the election. 
Section 6.2.2 - Qualification Period. 
In the case of a general election held in an odd-numbered year the candidate shall register with the city clerk and remit the appropriate fees for the office he or she seeks between 8:30 a.m. on the second Monday in September and 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In even numbered years, qualification shall be between 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August and 4:30 p.m. the following Friday. 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
Section 6.2.3 - Qualification Fees. 
The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election shall be three (3) percent of the total gross salary of the office sought, which fees shall be received by the city administrator at the time of filing the notice of candidacy and paid over to the city. 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Section 6.2.4 - Withdrawal of Candidacy. 
Any candidate may withdraw his name as a candidate prior to October 15 of the election year. No refund will be made to any candidate for the fee remitted to qualify for office. 
Article 6.3 - Voting 

Section 6.3.1 - Electors to be Registered by County. 
The city council shall provide by contract for the use of the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in any municipal primary or election. 
State Law reference— Duty of registrars to furnish list of electors, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-227. 
Section 6.3.2 - Absentee Ballot. 
It shall be lawful for any qualified voter of the city to vote by absentee ballot as provided by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380. 
Chapter 7 - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
Article 7.1 - Standard Construction Specifications 

Section 7.1.1 - Purpose and Scope. 
The standard construction specifications are intended to provide the standards to any person, firm, corporation or agent involved in land-disturbing activities to use in the design and construction of streets, utilities and other facilities and services within the City of Roswell. 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 7.1.2 - Adoption of Standards. 
There is hereby adopted the Standard Construction Specifications of the City of Roswell, Georgia, as amended by resolution of mayor and city council from time to time. A current copy of the standard construction specifications is on file in the office of the engineering division manager and is attached to Ordinance 2003-12-30 as Exhibit "A". 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 7.1.3 - Jurisdiction and Enforcement. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. These specifications shall govern all construction activities of residential, industrial, commercial, apartments, condominiums and semi-public and public places. These standards shall apply to both public and private street development. 
(b)  Enforcement. Unless otherwise specified within the construction specifications, the engineering manager or his designee shall have general charge and supervision of the standard construction specifications and shall require all builders and contractors to conform with these specifications. 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 7.1.4 - Conflicts. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance or statute of the City of Roswell apply to the same subject matter, the ordinance requiring the most restrictive standard shall apply. 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 7.1.5 - Appeals. 
Appeals to these design standards or an interpretation of these standards by a city official shall be made to the mayor and city council. Such appeal shall be made in writing and shall be filed with the City Clerk of Roswell within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Section 7.1.6 - Violation and Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of these specifications and plans or fails to comply with any section and/or provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, as amended or any regulations which are cited and/or referred to in this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days and/or to work on the public streets or public works of the City of Roswell for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, either or both such fine, imprisonment or work on the streets or public works, in the discretion of the court. 
(2003-12-30, Added, 12/08/2003) 
Article 7.2 - Post-Development Stormwater Management 

Section 7.2.1 - General Provisions. 
7.2.1.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Allow in appropriate situations the use of existing conditions curve numbers for redevelopment sites if it can be shown through rigorous and detailed downstream engineering analysis that no existing downstream drainage problems exist or are anticipated as a result of the redevelopment; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
7.2.1.2  Applicability. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be applicable to all land development, including but not limited to site plan applications, subdivision applications and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria unless requirements are waived by the public works / environmental director or designee: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the engineering division manager or the director of public works to be a hotspot land use; 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules; 
e.  New development that involves the creation or replacement of between one thousand (1,000) square feet and five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious cover for non-residential property shall provide water quality protection only using approved low impact development methods; or 
f.  Redevelopment that involves the creation or replacement of between one thousand (1,000) square feet and five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious cover for non-residential property shall provide water quality protection only using approved low impact development methods. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this ordinance: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director of public works. 
7.2.1.3  Designation of Ordinance Administrator. The public works/environmental director or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article of this ordinance. 
7.2.1.4  Stormwater Design Manual. The City of Roswell will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local regulations or procedures adopted by the public works/environmental department for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(2012-10-15, §§ 1, 2, Amended, 10/08/2012; 2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-04, Amended, 02/06/2003) 
State Law reference— Stormwater systems and codes are authorized under local home rule powers in Georgia Constitution art. IX § II, par. III(a)(6) and (12). 
Section 7.2.2 - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the (local jurisdiction) or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detailed downstream engineering analysis means that a rigorous and detailed downstream analysis can be conducted by an engineer in order to show that additional detention is unnecessary for a redevelopment site. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development means a land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual shall mean the latest version of the manual promulgated by the Atlanta Regional Commission, as amended and approved by the City of Roswell. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Low impact development methods means a stormwater management approach to manage rainfall in a way which more closely mimics the natural hydrologic system at the site prior to any development. Techniques include those which infiltrate, store, filter, evaporate and detain stormwater close to the location where the rain fell. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Roswell to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project means a land development project. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(2012-10-15, § 3, Amended, 10/08/2012; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.2.3 - Permit Procedures and Requirements. 
7.2.3.1  Permit Application Requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically exempted by this ordinance, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Roswell a permit application on a form provided by the City of Roswell for that purpose. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this ordinance, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 7.2.3.2; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 7.2.3.3; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 7.2.3.4, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 7.2.3.5, if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 7.2.3.6. 
7.2.3.2  Stormwater Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting. Before any development permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the City of Roswell public works/environmental director or designee for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal the following information should be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(a)  Existing Conditions/Proposed Site Plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Natural Resources Inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(c)  Stormwater Management System Concept Plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the greenspace projection plan, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
7.2.3.3  Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including the performance criteria set forth in section 7.2.4 below. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, and qualified in the field of water resources who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this ordinance are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(a)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(b)  Vicinity map. 
(c)  Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(d)  Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 7.2.4; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 7.2.4 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(e)  Stormwater Management System. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 7.2.4; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(f)  Post-Development Downstream Analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(g)  Construction-Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Roswell, Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance or NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(h)  Landscaping and Open Space Plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. Additional landscaping may be required outside these facilities, and the stormwater landscaping plan must be consistent with the plan for the entire development. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(i)  Operations and Maintenance Plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(j)  Maintenance Access Easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(k)  Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Roswell as provided in section 7.2.3.4 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 7.2.3.4. 
(l)  Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Local and Non-local Permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Roswell that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
7.2.3.4  Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Roswell requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Roswell, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Roswell prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify, by name or official title, the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Roswell may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 7.2.6 of this ordinance. 
The mayor and council of the City of Roswell, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
The city shall not be legally responsible for the inspection or maintenance of any stormwater management facilities including detention facilities or channels unless the same have been expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for such purposes. 
7.2.3.5  Performance and Maintenance Bonds (Reserved). 
7.2.3.6  Application Procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Roswell. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 7.2.3.1. 
(3)  The City of Roswell shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved within forty-five (45) working days. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Roswell shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the City of Roswell that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this ordinance, the City of Roswell may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this ordinance and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The City of Roswell shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Roswell; and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 7.2.5.2. 
7.2.3.7  Application Review Fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Roswell. 
7.2.3.8  Modifications for Off-Site Facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Roswell which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Roswell that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(2012-10-15, § 4, Amended, 10/08/2012; 2004-01-01, Added, 01/05/2004, 7.2.3.4 - last paragraph added; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.2.4 - Post-Development Stormwater Management Performance Criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this ordinance: 
7.2.4.1  Water Quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the director of public works are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
7.2.4.2  Stream Channel Protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
7.2.4.3  Overbank Flooding Protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 4.2 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
7.2.4.4  Extreme Flooding Protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
7.2.4.5  Structural Stormwater Controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City of Roswell before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Roswell may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
7.2.4.6  Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 7.2.4.1. The applicant may, if approved by the City of Roswell, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
7.2.4.7  Drainage System Guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
7.2.4.8  Dam Design Guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
7.2.4.9  Detailed Downstream Analysis Guidelines. For a redevelopment site subject to the Post Development Stormwater Ordinance, flexibility in determining curve numbers to quantify hydraulic values can be considered. In some basins and for some sites it may be possible to show through a rigorous and detailed engineering analysis that detention or additional detention should not be required for a particular site. The criteria that must be evaluated and submitted to the public works/environmental department includes: 
(a)  Analysis and review of habitable and non-habitable built structures downstream of the subject property for riverine flooding; 
(b)  Analysis of the infrastructure for conveyance and current condition; and 
(c)  Completion of a field investigation of the downstream receiving waters to evaluate scouring and stream bank and stream bed stability. 
The public works/environmental department will evaluate the engineering submittal to decide if additional detention and/or channel protection will be required. Water quality treatment utilizing low impact development methods will be required regardless of outcome of decision regarding additional detention and/or channel protection. 
The detailed downstream analysis shall be conducted from the downstream point on the subject property to the ten-percent analysis point or to a point where the drainage basin downstream equals ten (10) times the subject site drainage basin or to a point where receiving waters are met which have a minimum six hundred forty (640) acres of drainage area. 
(2012-10-15, § 5, Amended, 10/08/2012; 2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.2.5 - Construction Inspections of Post-Development Stormwater Management System. 
7.2.5.1  Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted if required by the staff of the City of Roswell Engineering Division or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the engineering division manager. Inspections shall follow procedures established in the City of Roswell subdivision regulations and construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. In no instance shall such inspection impose any duty or liability upon the City of Roswell, its agents, officers, or employees. 
7.2.5.2  Final Inspection and As Built Plans. Upon completion of a project and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. As built plans must be approved by the public works/environmental director or designee. A final inspection by the City of Roswell is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(2012-10-15, § 6, Amended, 10/08/2012; 2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.2.6 - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. 
7.2.6.1  Long-Term Maintenance Inspection of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this ordinance. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Roswell shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the deficiencies which must be corrected to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Roswell, may correct the violation as provided in subsection 7.2.6.4 hereof. 
Inspection programs by the City of Roswell may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
7.2.6.2  Right-of-Entry for Inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Roswell to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance. 
7.2.6.3  Records of Maintenance Activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Roswell. 
7.2.6.4  Failure to Maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Roswell, after thirty (30) days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Roswell may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.2.7 - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. 
7.2.7.1  Notice of Violation. If the City of Roswell determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Roswell by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
7.2.7.2  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Roswell shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Roswell may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The City of Roswell may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The City of Roswell may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The City of Roswell may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the City of Roswell may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations]. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. Any person failing to comply with this ordinance shall be in violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the penalties specified in section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances in addition to any provided in this article. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-04, Amended, 12/16/2002) 
Article 7.3 - Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 21, 2010, repealed art. 7.3 and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. 7.3, §§ 7.3.1—7.3.10, pertained to erosion and sedimentation and derived from 2002-07-02, adopted July 1, 2002; 2002-11-02, adopted Nov. 4, 2002; 2002-12-02, adopted Dec. 9, 2002; 2003-02-01, adopted Feb. 3, 2003; 2003-12-30, adopted Dec. 8, 2003; 2004-06-18, adopted June 21, 2004; 2007-03-03, adopted March 5, 2007; and 2008-01-01, adopted Jan. 7, 2008. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 2-6-1 et seq. establish a soil erosion and sediment control program. 

Section 7.3.1 - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Roswell Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.2 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
City: The City of Roswell, Georgia. 
City administrator: The person appointed to such office by the mayor and the city council of Roswell. 
City engineer: The person designated as such by the mayor and city council of Roswell. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as "excavation". 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 7.3.4 C. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 7.3.3, paragraph 5. 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA): The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Mayor and city council: The mayor and city council of Roswell, Georgia. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Point source: Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure or container from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term also means sheetflow which is later conveyed via a point source to waters of the state. 
Pollution: The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water due to a point source. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Fulton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article have their common dictionary definition. 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.3 - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs 15 and 16 of section 7.3.4 C., no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less five thousand (5,000) square feet, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraph 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.4 - Minimum requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using Best Management Practices. 
A.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections B. and C. of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in subsections B. and C. of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph 2. of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections C.15. and 16. of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  General design principles. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection B.2. of this section; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph 16. of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 
twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
17.  Rezoning plans and development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. No rezoning application shall be considered and no land-disturbing activities shall occur on any slope in excess of twenty-five (25) percent within five hundred (500) feet of any state waters or stream identified on the Water Resources Protection Map, latest version, without the submittal of a steep slope and erodible soils evaluation. For purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that based on a field evaluation do not have a discernible flow at the time of the evaluation. Field evaluations shall not be made within forty-eight (48) hours of any rainfall event of 0.10 inches or greater or within seven (7) days of any rainfall event of 0.5 inches or greater. The rainfall measurement shall be based on the City of Roswell rainfall gauge closest to the site. 
This section shall be in addition to other buffer requirements and shall not exempt any sites from any other requirements of The City of Roswell. This section shall also apply to filling activities that occur within five hundred (500) feet of a "state waters" or included streams, as defined herein, when any part of that fill slope exceeds twenty-five (25) percent. 
This section shall not apply to projects with a total site area of less than one (1) acre. 
The steep slopes and erodible soils evaluation shall consist of the following: 
a.  This section shall be in addition to other buffer requirements and shall not exempt any sites from the other requirements of this article or Unified Development Code (UDC). 
b.  A steep slope and erodible soils evaluation shall be conducted in accordance with the evaluation procedures and criteria specified herein or a comparable method approved by the city engineer for sites containing or near to streams, wetlands, or other water bodies where: 
i.  Slopes exceed ten (10) percent within five hundred (500) feet of a state water or included stream, as defined in this section. 
ii.  Soil erodibility K values exceed .24 within five hundred (500) feet of the streams, wetlands, or water bodies; or 
iii.  The vegetative cover within one hundred (100) feet of the streams, wetlands, or water bodies is: bare soil; fallow land; crops; active pasture in poor or fair condition; orchard - tree farm in poor or fair condition; brush - weeds in poor condition; or woods in poor condition. 
c.  The evaluation report shall be submitted for review to the city engineer. This report shall include, as a minimum, the following: 
i.  A plan, at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, that shows: 
1.  Existing topography with contour intervals no greater than five (5) feet; 
2.  Mapped soils as shown in soil surveys; 
3.  Field delineated, marked and surveyed streams and wetlands; 
4.  Existing vegetation; 
5.  Existing sub drainage areas of the site; and 
6.  Slopes in each sub drainage area segmented into sections of slopes less than or equal to ten (10) percent; eleven (11) to nineteen (19) percent; and greater than or equal to twenty (20) percent; 
ii.  All slope analysis data forms; 
iii.  A summary of findings including information pertinent to the evaluation of the site; and 
iv.  A mitigation plan that describes the proposed additional protective measures for those areas where development is allowed with restrictions. 
d.  The site shall be evaluated by assessing each segment of each sub drainage area using the evaluation criteria in Table 1. Each segment shall be given a score for slope, slope length, soil erodibility, vegetative cover, and sediment delivery. A total score shall be assigned for each segment. A segment of a sub drainage area with a total score of thirty-five (35) or greater shall be designated as part of the buffer and no development shall be approved in that segment. A segment with a total score of twenty-five (25) or thirty (30) shall require the application of additional protective measures as required by the city engineer of the community development department; however, development shall not be prohibited and that area shall not be part of the buffer. A segment with a score of twenty (20) or less shall be developed with standard protective measures and that area shall not be required to be part of the buffer. 
Table I: Evaluation Criteria for Steep Slopes and Erodible Soils 

 
(1)  Poor condition: < 50% ground cover 
Fair conditions: 50% to 75% ground cover 
Good condition: > 75% ground cover 
Exemptions to this section shall be as follows: 
No application for a development permit shall be approved and no permit shall be issued for any land-disturbing activity inconsistent with this section, unless: 
(a)  The city engineer, or in his or her absence the zoning director, after consulting with the director of public works/environmental, or his or her designee authorizes land disturbance for the construction of: a stream crossing by a drive-way, transportation route, or utility line parallel to a stream but not closer than twenty-five (25) feet from a stream bank unless due to natural conditions in an area, such construction would be less harmful to the environment than if it were located outside the protection area; or 
(b)  The city engineer with the approval of the mayor and city council finds and determines that the proposed work will not impair the quality, vitality and stability of the protection area and will not destroy more than a minimum amount of the riparian cover within the parcel; or 
(c)  The city engineer with the approval of the mayor and city council authorizes redevelopment of a tract or parcel where an equivalent amount of clearance and improvement are located thereon; or, where the opinion of the city engineer after consulting with the director of public works/environmental or his or her designee is that the proposed work will not impair the quality, vitality and stability of the protection area; or 
(d)  A structure is being repaired or rebuilt after being damaged by fire or other disaster and the city engineer determines that reasonable efforts to protect the adjacent stream have been taken; or 
(e)  The city engineer with the approval of the mayor and city council grants a variance from the requirements of this article because exceptional circumstances exist such that a strict adherence to the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship and/or would not further the intent of the article; or 
(f)  The city engineer, or in his or her absence the zoning director, after consulting with the director of public works/environmental or his or her designee authorizes an exception to these rules to allow construction of a detention, retention or sediment control pond, facility or storm drainage structure within a required buffer, setback or protection area where it is deemed to be in the best interest of the water resources system. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections B. and C. of this section. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 10/28/2013; 2012-07-09, §§ 1, 2, Amended, 07/09/2012; 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.5 - Application/Permit process. 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the storm water management ordinance, Unified Development Code (UDC), flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Roswell, Georgia without first obtaining a permit from city engineer to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city engineer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection C. of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 7.3.4 B. and C. of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five (5) paper copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans or equivalent plans compliant with the current version of the City of Roswell Electronic Plan Submittal Guidelines. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
3.  A fee, payable to the City of Roswell, in the amount set by resolution of the mayor and city council as amended from time to time, shall be charged for each application for commercial, industrial or residential developments. For projects with a disturbed area of one (1) acre or more additional fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 7.3.4 C.15. and 16. has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 7.3.5 B.6., have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
6.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 7.3.4B. and C. of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 7.3.4 C.15. and 16. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 7.3.5 B.6. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 10/28/2013; 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.6 - Inspection and Enforcement. 
A.  The city engineer or his designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. 
B.  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The city engineer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the District and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(2012-07-09, § 3, Amended, 07/09/2012; 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.7 - Penalties and Incentives. 
A.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-work orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; further, nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate issuance of a citation for any violation of this article; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 7.3.5. B.6. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary penalties. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under city ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
2.  The owner, or operator, shall bear the final responsibility for the installation, maintenance and construction of all required erosion control measures according to the provisions and standards and specifications of this article. To insure compliance, both may be cited. 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.8 - Education and Certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.9 - Administrative Appeal/Judicial Review. 
A.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; or the call of a bond; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit; or cited as an owner to a hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.10 - Establishment of Soil Erosion Fund and Committee. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to provide procedures and standards for the payment of erosion and sediment fees by developers of any project which requires a building permit to meet the demands placed on the community to remedy problems, hazards, or undesirable effects caused by soil erosion from undeterminable sources. 
(b)  A soil erosion fee shall be required to be submitted to the city engineer prior to the issuance of any building permit for any improvement, grading, or alteration of land(s) or building(s) commences, for all structures and uses except as provided herein: 
1.  Minor repairs or additions to the principal building in existence on the tract or lot where a determination is made by the city engineer that the permit issued shall not result in any land disturbance activity. 
2.  Where any permit is issued for any repair, addition, or improvement solely within the interior of any building or structure. 
3.  For any accessory use or structure to the principal use or structure where a building permit is issued where a determination is made by the city engineer that either no land disturbance shall occur, or the permit is for such use or structure that will result in no soil erosion. 
(c)  Where any fee is required in accord with this section, the amount of such fee shall be in the amount set by resolution of the mayor and city council as amended from time to time. 
(d)  Pursuant to the provisions of this section, a City of Roswell Erosion and Sediment Control Fund is hereby established. All fees collected under this section shall be credited to such fund. Disbursements from this fund will be made by the mayor, after an affirmative recommendation from the Erosion and Sediment Control fund committee ("committee") is received. The erosion and sediment control committee shall be composed of the mayor, the councilperson assigned to be the liaison to the environmental/public works department, the councilperson assigned to be the liaison to the community development department, the city administrator, the director of environmental/public works, the director of community development, and the director of transportation. The city administrator, two (2) of the three (3) elected officials (the mayor and two department liaisons), and two (2) of the three (3) directors (department heads) shall constitute a quorum and shall be able to transact business of the committee. Each member shall have equal voting privileges on committee issues. The city engineer shall serve as the fund coordinator and shall review properly completed applications for eligibility to fund proceeds. The city engineer shall also serve as the technical presenter of the application to the members of the committee but shall not be considered a member of the committee for voting purposes. 
(e)  All funds arising from the collection of fees under this article shall be used for the purpose of reducing hazards, damage, unsightliness, or other effect of soil erosion which has been determined by the committee to be an erosion and sediment control problem from an undeterminable source. It is the intent of this section that any soil erosion resulting from a determinable source be corrected by appropriate legal means available to the city. Funds under this article may be used for the stated purposes for erosion and sediment control problems arising from a determinable source, where the committee has consulted the city attorney and judged such to be in the best interest of the community. 
(2012-07-09, § 4, Amended, 07/09/2012; 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Section 7.3.11 - Effectivity, Validity and Liability. 
A.  Effectivity. This ordinance shall become effective the day following its adoption. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(2012-07-09, § 5, Amended, 07/09/2012; 2010-06-12, § 1(Exh. A), Added, 06/21/2010) 
Article 7.4 - Flood Damage Prevention[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 2, 2008, amended Art. 7.4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 7.4, §§ 7.4.1—7.4.6, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 2003-12-30, adopted Dec. 8, 2003. 

Section 7.4.1 - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives. 
(a)  Statutory Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and the city council of Roswell, Georgia, does ordain this ordinance and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(b)  Findings of Fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Roswell are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(c)  Statement of Purpose. Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.2 - General Provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This ordinance shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Roswell. 
(c)  Designation of Ordinance Administrator. The director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard—Flood Area Maps and Studies. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated May 7, 2001, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Roswell; or 
(b)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Roswell; or 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the floodplain administrator. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at City Hall, 38 Hill Street, Roswell Georgia. 
(e)  Compatibility with Other Regulations. This ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance. 
(g)  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Roswell or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.3 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood-prone areas as referenced in section 1.4. All streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 15, 1998. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 15, 1998. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 15, 1998 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 15, 1998. 
NFIP means National Flood Insurance Program. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Roswell to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.4 - Permit Procedures and Requirements. 
(a)  Permit Application Requirements: 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically excluded by this ordinance, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the floodplain administrator a permit application on a form provided by the floodplain administrator for that purpose. 
(3)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this ordinance. 
(b)  Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. An application for a development project within any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(b)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(c)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(d)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(e)  Proposed grading plan; 
(f)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
(g)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
(h)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(i)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 7.4.6(b)(2); 
(d)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 7.4.6(a)(5); or 
(e)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this ordinance. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or flood-proofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. Duties of the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 7.4.5 and 7.4.6; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the director of the public works/environmental department or their designee/the floodplain administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.5 - Standards for Development. 
(a)  Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the floodplain administrator. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the floodplain administrator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  Definition of Floodway Boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the floodplain administrator. If floodway data is not available from the floodplain administrator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the floodplain administrator. 
(c)  General Standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(b)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2) percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection 7.5.4(d); 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the floodplain administrator using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of subsection 7.4.6(d) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the floodplain administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the floodplain administrator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway Encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the floodplain administrator until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the floodplain administrator. 
(f)  Maintenance Requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The floodplain administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Roswell) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.6 - Provisions for Flood Damage Reduction. 
(a)  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated Buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood water in both directions. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(b)  Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Within the Future-Conditions Floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in subsection 7.4.6(a), shall apply: 
(1)  Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7.4.6(a)(5). 
(b)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7.4.6(a)(5). 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator. 
(b)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the floodplain administrator to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Accessory Structures and Facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all flood water in accordance with subsection 7.4.6(a)(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(b)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 7.4.6(b)(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
(a)  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 7.4.5(c), (d) and (e) have been met. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 7.4.5(7). 
(c)  Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain. 
(1)  Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(d)  Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the floodplain administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this ordinance. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 7.4.6(a)(5). 
(e)  Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7.4.6(a)(5); 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide flood water around and away from any proposed structure. 
(e)  Standards for Subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 7.4.4(b); 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Roswell to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.7 - Variance Procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the floodplain administrator, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the floodplain administrator. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the floodplain administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the board of zoning appeals as established by the City of Roswell in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the board of zoning appeals. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal such decision to the Fulton County Superior Court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the floodplain administrator and/or the board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
(8)  Conditions for variances: 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the floodplain administrator and the board of zoning appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator and the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Section 7.4.8 - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of Violation. If the floodplain administrator determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the floodplain administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(b)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the floodplain administrator shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the (local permitting authority) may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The floodplain administrator may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The floodplain administrator may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The floodplain administrator may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the floodplain administrator may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the floodplain administrator shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the floodplain administrator has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the floodplain administrator may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 06/02/2008, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Article 7.5 - Illicit Discharges and Illegal Connections 

Section 7.5.1 - General Provisions. 
7.5.1.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This ordinance establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this ordinance are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance. 
7.5.1.2  Applicability. The provisions of this ordinance shall apply throughout the City of Roswell. 
7.5.1.3  Responsibility for Administration. The City of Roswell shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.2 - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this ordinance which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 7.5.3 of this ordinance. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
a)  Owned or maintained by the City of Roswell; 
b)  Not a combined sewer; and 
c)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this ordinance, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.3 - Prohibitions. 
7.5.3.1  Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the City of Roswell as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
7.5.3.2  Prohibition of Illegal Connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(a)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(b)  A person violates this ordinance if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)  Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Fulton County Public Works Department. 
(d)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the City of Roswell requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the City of Roswell. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.4 - Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges. 
7.5.4.1  Industrial or Construction Activity Discharge. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City of Roswell prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
7.5.4.2  Portable Toilet Prohibition. 
a.  Property owners, occupants, managers or other persons in charge of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facility, including construction or demolition sites, shall be responsible for the placement and sanitary maintenance of portable toilets. 
b.  Portable toilets shall be installed in a level position and be easily accessible to users. 
c.  Portable toilets shall not be located upon any street or public right-a-way, storm drain, or within one hundred (100) feet from any body of water including but not limited to project ponds with over flow devices. 
d.  Portable toilets shall be located upon natural ground and not on an impervious surface such as concrete or asphalt. 
e.  Portable toilets shall not be located whereby a spill or runoff will enter into storm drains or any water system. 
f.  Portable toilets are not to be washed down whereby allowing contamination runoff to pollute soil and water resources and create potential human health issues and/or aquatic degradation. 
g.  Portable toilets must be cleaned and serviced by a licensed nonsewered toilet system (NTS) company at least once per week or when needed to maintain sanitary conditions. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.5 - Access and Inspection of Properties and Facilities. 
The City of Roswell shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance. 
(a)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the City of Roswell. 
(b)  The owner or operator shall allow the City of Roswell ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(c)  The City of Roswell shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City of Roswell to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(d)  The City of Roswell may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the City of Roswell. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the City of Roswell and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Roswell access to a facility is a violation of this ordinance. 
(g)  If the City of Roswell has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the City of Roswell is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the City of Roswell may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.6 - Notification of Accidental Discharges and Spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the municipal separate storm sewer system, state waters, or Waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person, by phone, or facsimile no later than twenty-four (24) hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Roswell within three (3) business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this ordinance. 
(2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.5.7 - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
7.5.7.1  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the City of Roswell is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The City of Roswell is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 7.5.7.5. 
7.5.7.2  Notice of Violation. Whenever the City of Roswell finds that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the City of Roswell may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(a)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this ordinance and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City of Roswell by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of service of notice of violation. 
(b)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
(6)  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
7.5.7.3  Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the City of Roswell. The notice of appeal must be received within ten (10) days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the City of Roswell or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
7.5.7.4  Enforcement Measures after Appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the City of Roswell, then representatives of the City of Roswell may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
7.5.7.5  Costs of Abatement of the Violation. Within sixty (60) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within thirty (30) days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within thirty (30) days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Roswell by reason of such violation. 
7.5.7.6  Civil Penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Roswell shall deem appropriate, after the City of Roswell has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City of Roswell may impose a penalty no less than $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
7.5.7.7  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the City of Roswell may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
7.5.7.8  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
7.5.7.9  Remedies not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this ordinance are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the City of Roswell may seek cumulative remedies. 
The City of Roswell may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-03, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Article 7.6 - Litter Control 

Section 7.6.1 - General Provisions. 
Section 7.6.1.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Roswell of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Roswell and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
Section 7.6.1.2  Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Roswell. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-05, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.6.2 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
Yard waste means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscape development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(2004-01-04, Amended, 01/21/2004; 2002-12-05, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.6.3 - Prohibition Against Littering Public or Private Property or Waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the City of Roswell or any waters in the City of Roswell unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
Section 7.6.3.1  Yard Waste. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, cause or permit the dumping, blowing, depositing, or placing of yard waste, including any yard debris, grass clippings, weeds, leaves, and tree branches upon any street, sidewalk, avenue or other public property in the city without permission from the city, or into any river, creek, branch, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin in the City of Roswell. Proper disposal of yard waste materials is found in Chapter 24, Utilities and Services, Section 24.1.7, Yard Waste - Preparation and Placement for Collection. 
(2004-01-04, Added, 01/21/2004, 7.5.3.1 added; 2002-12-05, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.6.4 - Vehicle Loads Causing Litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(2002-12-05, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Section 7.6.5 - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
Section 7.6.5.1  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this ordinance, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
Section 7.6.5.2  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this ordinance, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this ordinance. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this ordinance is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this ordinance. 
Section 7.6.5.3  Penalties. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the City of Roswell for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the City of Roswell; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this ordinance. 
Section 7.6.5.4  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(2003-12-30, Renumbered, 12/08/2003; 2002-12-05, Added, 12/16/2002) 
Chapter 8 - HEALTH AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Article 8.1 - Animal Control[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animal control is a local home rule power under Georgia Constitution art. IX, § 22, par. III(a)(3). 

Section 8.1.1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings as ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any animal that is placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of such private property. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which is upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended or without proper food and water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control officer shall refer to an individual employed by the health department or its designee to perform and execute the provisions of this article, and his office shall have the power to issue citations in violation of this article. 
Animal under restraint means any animal: 
(1)  Secured by a leash or lead or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; 
(2)  Under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, that person being actually present with the animal; or 
(3)  Confined within a vehicle that is parked or in motion. 
Casual sale means the occasional sale of domestic dogs and their issue in the pursuit of hobbies or in the course of raising domestic dogs. Any person or kennel selling more than ten (10) domestic dogs in a calendar year shall not be deemed as engaging in casual sale of domestic dogs. 
Commercial kennel means a dedicated structure or portion of a structure operated as a business enterprise for the care, grooming, boarding, breeding, whelping, feeding and commercial sale of domestic dogs. 
Commercial sale means the sale of domestic dogs to the general public with the intent to operate a commercial or business enterprise, not related to a hobby. The sale of ten (10) or more domestic dogs during a calendar year shall be presumed to be commercial sales. 
Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept as a pet for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals and other animals associated with man's environment. Livestock, including but not limited to all swine, are not considered pets for purposes of this article. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that according to the records of any appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts injury on a human without provocation on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
Such categorization shall not apply to a dog if it bites a human: 
(1)  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
(2)  When its owner is being attacked. 
(3)  Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
(4)  Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
Domesticated animal means any animal that is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. 
Exotic animal means any animal of any kind which is not indigenous to the State of Georgia, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command or any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
Guide dog means a dog trained for and used by blind persons, visually handicapped persons and deaf persons. 
Health officer shall mean the Commissioner of Health of Fulton County, or his authorized representative so long as Fulton County is under contract with the City of Roswell to operate the dog pound and perform animal and rabies control services for the city. 
Hobby kennel means a dedicated structure or portion of a structure for the care, grooming, boarding, breeding, whelping, feeding and casual sale of domestic dogs for one's enjoyment and pursuit of a hobby, including but not limited to competition among breeders of purebred domestic dogs for recognition at local, state and national levels. 
Issue means the immature offspring of domestic dogs herein defined as four (4) months old or less. 
Kennel means a dedicated structure or portion of a structure for the care, grooming, boarding, breeding, whelping, and feeding of domestic dogs. 
License tag shall mean a metal tag issued on behalf of Fulton County by the health officer after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. 
Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
Pound shall mean the facilities operated by the health officer for confining dogs impounded under the provisions of this regulation. 
Vaccinate shall mean the injection, by a licensed veterinarian, of a specified dose of USDA approved vaccine. 
Vaccination tag shall mean any metal tag issued by licensed veterinarians in the State of Georgia and supplied to dog owners upon vaccination. 
Vicious animal means any animal which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals. The term shall include an animal that has on one (1) or more occasions caused physical injury to a human being or other domestic animal without provocation whether on public or private property. 
Section 8.1.2 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. This article sets forth necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of animals which threaten the safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards, and all areas of the city. 
Section 8.1.3 - Enforcing Agency. 
The Fulton County Health Department or its designee shall enforce this article by means of impoundment and court citations. City of Roswell code enforcement officers shall also have authority to issue citations based on violations of this article and initiate proceedings to have a dog designated as dangerous or potentially dangerous. 
Section 8.1.4 - Licenses for Dogs and Cats; Vaccination/License Tag Required. 
(a)  The owner, possessor or harborer of each dog or cat over four (4) months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the municipal limits of the City of Roswell at any time during the year shall apply for and obtain a license for such dog or cat from Fulton County. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons having custody of any dog or cat over four (4) months of age brought into the City of Roswell to obtain a dog or cat license within fourteen (14) days from the date of entry. 
(c)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in Roswell and Fulton County, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the Fulton County Animal Control for a vaccination/license tag. 
(d)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this article, provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat also make payment of a license fee. The vaccination/license tag shall be available throughout the year and is issued on behalf of Fulton County by the health department or its designee(s), which may include licensed veterinarians. 
Section 8.1.5 - Wild or Exotic Animals. 
Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
Section 8.1.6 - Bird Sanctuary; Area Designated. 
The entire area within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful for any person to trap without a federal permit, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests within the city. Provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular location that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property, and if no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then these birds may be destroyed under the supervision of the chief of police. 
Section 8.1.7 - Kennels; Permits. 
Where there are four (4) or more domestic dogs, each over the age of four (4) months, kept, maintained or harbored on an appropriately zoned premises, the premises shall be deemed to constitute a kennel; and every kennel shall be subject to regulation and inspection by the health officer. Three (3) domestic dogs or less, not including their issue, shall be allowed in every Unified Development Code (UDC) district. A premises occupied by more than three (3) domestic dogs shall fall into one (1) of two (2) categories. These categories are hobby kennels or commercial kennels. Hobby kennels may only be allowed in the RS-87 and RS-30 (single-family residential) with a minimum of two (2) acres and a maximum of ten (10) domestic dogs, not including their issue. Hobby kennels shall be restricted to casual sale. Commercial kennels shall only be allowed in the NX, CX, SH, CC, PV, CH, DX, DH, OR and IX; outdoor animal care shall a conditional use in IX. Commercial sales may be allowed within a commercial kennel. 
The breeding and sale of dogs or their issue for commercial purposes without adequate care and breeding and maintaining of the dogs, resulting in unhealthy or genetically inferior animals being offered for sale shall be prohibited. 
The owner or person in possession of the premises where a hobby kennel is located shall be required to apply to the Fulton County Animal Control Department for a special permit. Each permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issue. All sales from a hobby kennel shall be recorded. Additionally, such records shall be subject to review of the City of Roswell, upon demand, to ensure the limits of casual sale have not been exceeded. 
All commercial kennels are subject to a business license fee from the City of Roswell. Individual license tags will be issued for each dog in such kennel. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.1.8 - Cruelty to Animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait, poison or in any way bother any animal. Any person who inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon any animal, or tortures, torments, deprives of necessary food, drink, shelter and protection from the weather shall be in violation of this article and punished as provided in section 8.1.26. 
Section 8.1.9 - Running at Large Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having an animal in his custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the city, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property or of the person in possession of that property. Such restriction shall not apply to cats. 
Section 8.1.10 - Duty to Keep Animal under Restraint While on Property. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal, or any person having any animal in his possession or custody, to ensure that the animal is enclosed by a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by a leash or in some other physical manner or under control by a competent person so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian except as provided in this article. It is the intent of this article that all animals be prevented from leaving while unattended the real property limits of their owners, possessors or custodians thereof. 
Section 8.1.10.1 - Tethering of Dogs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Tethered means a dog attached to either a single point or a trolley system by a cable or similar device. This shall not include using a leash for walking purposes. Use of any chain for tethering is prohibited. 
(2)  Trolley system means a method to confine a dog by tethering the dog to a cable. The trolley system must be attached to two (2) fixed points and be free of hazards. The trolley system must be of appropriate configuration to confine the dog to the owner's property. 
(3)  Single point or fixed tether means a method of restraint using a cable or similar device attached to a dog and connected to a single object fixed into the ground, whether natural or manmade. 
(4)  Unattended means a dog which is not in direct sight of an owner, possessor or custodian who is outside with the dog. 
(5)  Choke chain collar is a collar made of metal links and designed to control a dog by tightening around the dog's neck. 
(6)  Pinch or prong collar is made of a series of fang-shaped metal links with blunted points that, when activated, pinch or impale the loose skin of a dog's neck. 
(b)  Tethering an unattended dog, whether by means of a single point or fixed tether, or by means of a trolley system, is prohibited. 
(c)  Tethering of a dog attended by an owner, possessor or custodian (dog is in direct sight), is permitted, provided that the dog is attended at all times, and further, that any tether used must be attached to a harness or buckle-type collar. No tether shall be wrapped directly around the dog's neck. Collars must allow enough room between the collar and the dog's throat or neck for two (2) fingers to fit. Choke, pinch or prong collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering. Any tether used shall not be weighted such as to inhibit the dog's movement. It shall be prima facie evidence that a tether is too heavy and therefore not permissible, if the weight of such tether exceeds ten (10) percent of the dog's body weight. 
(d)  This section is intended to be available to any enforcing agency authorized to act on behalf of the City of Roswell pursuant to section 8.1.3. 
( 2018-04-04 , § 1, Added 04/23/2018) 
Section 8.1.11 - Duty to Keep Animal under Restraint While off Property. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal or any person having an animal in his possession to keep that animal under control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor, or custodian. Under control means confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, or properly confined within an enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
Section 8.1.12 - Guard Dogs. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and prominently post the following notice on the outside of the property: 
"WARNING GUARD DOG" 
in either red or black letters upon a white back-ground, large enough to be easily read at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet. In the case of a building, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about every entrance and every exit. In the case of a general enclosure in which a guard dog is located, the notices shall be conspicuously posted upon the enclosure at a distance not greater than fifty (50) feet apart as well as upon every entrance and every exit through the enclosure. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium or building solely, the notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about every entrance and every exit. 
Any person that sells, leases, and/or rents guard dogs to be used in City of Roswell shall notify Fulton County Animal Control of the location, number, breed and sex of all dogs in use. 
Section 8.1.13 - Public Nuisance. 
Any animal which satisfies one (1) of the following conditions is hereby declared to be a public nuisance: 
(a)  Is found at large in violation of section 8.1.9; 
(b)  Is a vicious animal and while on the property of its owner is not kept in a locked pen or kennel with secured sides and an attached top; or while off the real property of its owner, is not muzzled and kept secured by a leash or chain held by a competent person; 
(c)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(d)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(e)  Violates the leash provisions of this article and turns over garbage containers or spreads garbage over the rights-of-way of the City of Roswell; 
(f)  Makes or causes frequent or long continued noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; or 
(g)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare or safety according to rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health. 
Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
Section 8.1.14 - Injuring Companion Animals; Notice Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person injuring a companion animal by running over or into the animal, or coming into contact with it with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle, to fail to notify immediately the owner of the animal, the animal control center or the police department. 
Section 8.1.15 - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any animal within the City of Roswell. Each person who knowingly abandons an animal, or willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any animal, shall be in violation of this section. 
Section 8.1.16 - Vaccination. 
(a)  Each dog or cat kept, maintained or harbored in the City of Roswell at any time shall wear affixed to its collar a current vaccination tag as prescribed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Any licensed veterinarian shall be entitled in connection with his practice, on the request of any given dog owner, to vaccinate such dog or dogs against rabies, provided that at the time of such vaccination he attaches to a suitable collar, to be provided by the dog owner, a vaccination tag approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, bearing the official tag number. At the same time, the vet shall furnish to the dog owner a certificate or certificates certifying to the vaccination of each dog, furnishing one (1) copy to the Fulton County Department of Public Health and one (1) copy to be kept by the veterinarian for his files. With respect to show dogs, the vaccination tag shall not be attached to the collar if owner objects but shall be delivered to owner. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having charge of any dog or cat brought into the City of Roswell from outside of Fulton County to have such dog or cat vaccinated and to obtain a license tag, certificate and vaccination tag within fourteen (14) days from the date of entry, provided, that when the owner or person having charge of such dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health officer that such dog has a current vaccination certificate or tag as prescribed by this regulation by a person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine or has a current vaccination tag issued by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, such dog shall not be required to be vaccinated again until the date of expiration of the current vaccination. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag or license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove the tags from any animal without the consent of its owner or possessor. 
Section 8.1.17 - Rabies Cases to be Reported. 
It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal or of an animal showing rabid symptoms, to immediately report such animal to the health officer and give as much additional pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the Fulton County Health Department or its designee. 
Section 8.1.18 - Quarantine. 
(a)  In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital, or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten (10) days from the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  In the event a warmblooded animal other than a dog or cat has bitten a human or other warmblooded animal, or in the event a warmblooded animal has been bitten by another warmblooded animal, the recommendations contained in the Georgia Department of Human Resources Rabies Control Manual shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to surrender a dog, cat or other animal which has bitten a human upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. 
(e)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate an area within which quarantine of all such animals shall be maintained and all such animals shall thereupon be immediately confined to the premises designated by the health officer in a manner approved by the health officer whether or not such animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No warmblooded animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health officer. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the health officer shall be maintained for such period as the health officer deems necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises and areas where rabid animals or animals suspected of rabies remain at large may be posted by the health officer with signs that read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies—Keep Away From Animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health officer and shall not be defaced or removed except by the health officer. Signs furnished and approved by the health officer shall be used. 
(i)  The owner or custodian of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the health officer under terms of this regulation shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the health officer deems necessary. 
(j)  The heads of all animals having had rabies or suspected of having had rabies at time of death shall be submitted to the health officer for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. 
Section 8.1.19 - Duty of Owner or Custodian; Procedure in Suspected Cases. 
(a)  Any dog that shows symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall be penned up immediately by its owner or custodian, and the animal control center shall be notified immediately. The dog shall be confined in a place approved by the animal control superintendent, and under conditions approved by him for not less than ten (10) days, and the dog shall be subject to observation by a person designated by the superintendent at all times during this period. 
(b)  If rabies does not develop within this period, then the dog shall be released to his owner following vaccination. If rabies does develop, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
Section 8.1.20 - Removal of Excrement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control or custody of a dog not to remove any excrement left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street, lot, public park or other area traversed by the public. Dog waste shall be immediately removed from areas traversed by the public by placing said matter in a sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle or refuse container. In areas along the City of Roswell's trail system, dog waste shall be removed from the trail and disposed of such that it is sufficiently away from areas traversed by the public and will not be stepped in, smell, or attract bugs in such a way as to disturb those using the trail. 
This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control or use of a guide dog. 
Section 8.1.21 - Reserved. 
Section 8.1.22 - Vicious and Dangerous Dogs; Precautions. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be vicious, dangerous, or potentially dangerous shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or anyone having any such animal in his/her possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodians or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, a secure top attached to all sides, the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by leash not more than six (6) feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e., beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)  Failure to keep any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference— Registration of dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
Section 8.1.23 - Notice to Dangerous or Potentially Dangerous Dog Owners. 
(a)  When an animal control officer or City of Roswell code enforcement officer classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the officer shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within fifteen (15) days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before a Fulton County Magistrate or City of Roswell Municipal Judge; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing. 
(b)  When a request for a hearing, as provided in this section is received, it shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. The initiating officer will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the judge shall receive such other evidence and hear such officer testimony as the judge may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within, ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the judge shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of his determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)  A certificate of registration to the effect that the dog owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the animal control officer, and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  An enclosure as prescribed in section 8.1.22 for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; 
(2)  The proper posting of the premises as prescribed in section 8.1.22; and 
(3)  An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to a dog, classified as dangerous, only. 
(e)  An annual fee may be charged in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the Fulton County Board of Commissioners. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the animal control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in section 8.1.22 of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, or been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If sold or donated to another resident of the City of Roswell, the new owner has ten (10) days after taking possession of the dog to register the dog with Fulton County Animal Control. If the owner moves with the dog from one jurisdiction to another within the State of Georgia, the owner shall register the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten (10) days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the State of Georgia shall register the dog as required in this article within thirty (30) days after becoming a resident. 
Section 8.1.24 - Impoundment of Animals. 
(a)  Dogs or other animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded: 
(1)  Animals whose ownership is unknown. 
(2)  Vicious dogs or dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined by section 8.1.22. 
(3)  Dogs in heat off the premises of their owners. 
(4)  Dogs or other animals which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by a dog or animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination tag. 
(6)  Dogs which have strayed from the premises of their owners. 
(7)  Wandering dogs. 
(8)  Warmblooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(9)  Unconfined warmblooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(10)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in danger. 
(b)  No dog or cat shall be exempted from this provision by virtue of vaccination, license tag or certificates. 
(c)  When a dog's owner can be readily identified and located, the health officer shall notify the owner that such dog has been impounded. If any impounded dog is not claimed within three (3) days of the date such dog is impounded, such dog shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the pound for such period of time as the health officer may deem necessary to protect the public health. The health officer may, at his discretion, offer for adoption any dog not redeemed or claimed within three (3) days by the person having right of possession. 
(d)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner or person adopting such animal shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee on any unvaccinated animal when vaccination is required by this article. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(e)  The health officer shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which he deals in carrying out the provisions of this regulation, but he shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
Section 8.1.25 - Reserved. 
Section 8.1.26 - Penalties for Violation of Article. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a potentially dangerous dog will be fined not less than $150.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $300.00 for a third conviction. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and will be fined not less than $500.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $750.00 for a third conviction. 
(d)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 8.1.22 of this article and his/her dog attacks or bites a human, he/she shall be subject to penalties as provided by state law. 
(e)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog knowingly and willfully fails to comply with section 8.1.22 of this article and his/her dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, he/she shall be subject to penalties as provided by state law. 
(f)  In addition to subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the animal control officer shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the health department and thereafter such animal shall be humanely destroyed. 
Section 8.1.27 - Penalty; Second Offense. 
Any person convicted of a second offense of this article, or rules and regulations promulgated hereto, may be, in addition to any other punishment or penalty, deprived of the right to keep a companion animal in the city for a period of up to two (2) years after such violation. Where the second offense involves serious death or injury to an individual, the animal may be subject to compulsory euthanasia following a hearing. 
Section 8.1.28 - Nuisance Abatement. 
Any violation of sections 8.1.7, 8.1.9, and 8.1.13 shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance for which an action in abatement may be instituted in addition to the penalties as provided in section 8.1.26 of this article. 
Article 8.2 - Emergency Management Services 

Section 8.2.1 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(a)  Reduce vulnerability of people and the community to damage, injury and loss of life and property resulting from natural or manmade catastrophes, riots or hostile military or paramilitary action. 
(b)  Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care and treatment of persons victimized or threatened by disaster. 
(c)  Provide a setting conducive to the rapid and orderly start of restoration and rehabilitation of persons and property affected by disasters. 
(d)  Clarify and strengthen the roles of the mayor, city council, city administrator and city departments in prevention of, preparation for, response to and recovery from disasters. 
(e)  Authorize and provide for cooperation of activities relating to disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery. 
(f)  Authorize and provide for coordination of activities relating to disaster prevention, preparedness, response and recovery by departments and officers of the city, agencies of the private sector and similar activities in which the federal government, the state and its political subdivisions may participate. 
(g)  Provide a disaster management system embodying all aspects of pre-disaster preparedness and post-disaster response. 
Section 8.2.2 - Emergency Defined. 
As used in this article " emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, disease, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war. Such term shall not include conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
Section 8.2.3 - Director of Emergency Management Services. 
The office of the director of emergency management services is hereby created. The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall nominate for appointment by the governor, a director, whose duties, upon appointment, shall be as follows: 
(a)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(b)  To coordinate the development of community-wide emergency preparedness; 
(c)  To develop an emergency and disaster operations plan for effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public; 
(d)  To prepare and recommend for approval by the city council mutual aid programs and agreements between other local governments and the city; 
(e)  To prepare and effectuate legal action for continuity of government in the event of emergency; 
(f)  To coordinate and advise government departments in development and implementation of the emergency and disaster operations plan and other required agencies or groups; 
(g)  During periods of emergency to obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and if required immediately, requisition same; and 
(h)  To procure federal and state assistance through emergency management channels and through federal assistance programs in such areas as law enforcement, highway safety, ambulance procurement, or emergency medical services and others. 
In addition to the above duties, the director of emergency management services shall be responsible during an emergency to advise the mayor in operational situations, public information and privileged information implementation of the emergency plan, to direct and coordinate the activities of the emergency operation center staff, and to assist the mayor in assuring the execution of operations plans and procedures required by the emergency. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. provide for local organizations and emergency powers for use in emergencies and disasters. 
Section 8.2.4 - Disaster Plan. 
The director shall prepare a comprehensive disaster basic plan which shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the council upon the recommendations of the director. Incorporated into such plan and expressly made a part thereof, shall be a crisis communications plan. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies be used to the fullest extent. The disaster plan shall be considered supplementary to this ordinance and have the effect of law whenever emergencies have been proclaimed. 
Section 8.2.5 - Emergency; Special Powers. 
In the event of man-made or natural disaster, mass electrical failure, rioting, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property, the mayor may declare that a state of emergency exists by written proclamation setting out the circumstances of the emergency and thereafter the mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem or city administrator, shall have and may exercise for any period as this state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(a)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(b)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public; 
(c)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any property or supplies among the inhabitants of the city; to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for the property or supplies; 
(d)  To declare a limited or general curfew as may be needed to restore public order; 
(e)  Ordering the closing of any business; 
(f)  Closing to public access any public building, street or other public place; 
(g)  To prohibit or regulate the possession, sale or use of explosives, gasoline or other flammable liquids, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind; and 
(h)  To perform and exercise any other functions and duties and take any emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well being of the inhabitants of the city. 
Section 8.2.6 - Mutual Aid. 
In periods of local emergency, the city is granted full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with local laws, ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefor. The city may request from state agencies mutual aid, including personnel, equipment and other available resources to assist the city during the local emergency plans or at the directions of the governor. 
Section 8.2.7 - Civil Liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance, or the failure to exercise or perform, a discretionary function or duty on the part of the city or any employee of the city excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any such employee, in carrying out emergency services as defined in section 8.2.2. 
(b)  The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws, ordinances and rules, all pensions, relief, disability workers' compensation and other benefits which apply to the activity of officers, agents or employees of the city when performing their respective functions within the territorial limits of the city shall apply to them to the same degree and extent while engaged in the performance of any of their functions and duties extra territorially under the provisions of this chapter, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith. 
(c)  Volunteers duly enrolled or registered with the city in a local emergency, a state of emergency, or a war emergency, or unregistered persons placed into service during a state of war emergency, in carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with any order or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or performing any of their authorized functions or duties or training for the performance of their authorized functions or duties, shall have the same degree of responsibility for their actions and enjoy the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar work. 
Article 8.3 - Fire Protection and Prevention[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection is a local home rule power under Georgia Constitution art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(1). 

Section 8.3.1 - Establishment of Department. 
There is hereby created and established a fire and rescue department known as the Roswell Fire Department, consisting of a chief, and such other members of said fire and rescue department as may from time to time be provided for by the mayor and city council. Members shall be appointed in the manner provided by law and this article. The objective of this department shall be the preservation and protection of life and property from fires and accidents. It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or spread of such fires. It shall be the duty of the rescue unit to render authorized emergency medical aid at the scene of a fire, accident, or emergency. 
(Resolution No. 2006-05-26, May 15, 2006) 
State Law reference— General powers and duties of local governments with respect to fire departments, O.C.G.A. §§ 25-3-1 et seq. and 25-4-1 et seq. 
Section 8.3.2 - Fire Chief. 
The fire chief shall be responsible for directing and supervising the operations and personnel of the Roswell Fire Department. Duties shall include implementing policies and procedures to enhance the operation of the department; reviewing training programs; conducting fire prevention and safety educational programs; and administering the departmental human resource program. The fire chief shall work under the limited supervision of the city administrator. 
(Resolution No. 2006-05-26, May 15, 2006) 
Section 8.3.3 - Oversight by Public Safety and Public Works Committee. 
The Public Safety and Public Works Committee as established by section 2.4.1 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances shall monitor the activities of the fire and rescue department, approve internal organization and rules and regulations of the volunteer organization, and act to insure that the lives and property of citizens of Roswell are protected. The fire chief shall serve as a liaison to such committee and make presentations and periodic reports as requested. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007; Resolution No. 2006-05-26, May 15, 2006) 
Section 8.3.4 - Deputy Chief. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a deputy chief who shall perform the duties of the chief in his absence and such other duties as set forth herein or as designated in the rules and regulations governing the department. 
Section 8.3.5 - Marshals and Deputies—Authority to Name. 
The mayor and city council are authorized to appoint a fire marshal for the city and as many deputy fire marshals as they deem proper. The fire marshal and his deputies will operate under the supervision of the fire chief. 
Section 8.3.6 - Reserved. 
Section 8.3.7 - Operations Manual. 
The fire and rescue department will be operated pursuant to the operations manual entitled "Roswell Fire and Rescue Department, Standard Operational Procedures" which is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. Changes to such manual shall be approved by the Public Safety and Public Works Committee. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 8.3.8 - Records. 
The fire chief shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all meetings of the department, the attendance and training of the members, a record of all fire calls, fire loss, rescue calls, response times, fire prevention activities, fire inspections, etc. Such records shall be filed with the city administrator. The fire chief shall make a report of such activities to the Public Safety and Public Works Committee as requested. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 8.3.9 - Rescue Service. 
The fire and rescue department shall provide rescue and emergency aid service. The rescue unit is a first responder unit that provides on-site care until the arrival of the duly certified ambulance service. In cases in which the officer in charge of the rescue unit considers that a life or death situation exists, the rescue unit may transport the victim to a medical facility. 
Section 8.3.10 - Command at Fires. 
In case of fire, the fire chief and his assistants shall rank in the order named and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department, and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible. When necessary for the protection of other property and to prevent the spread of the conflagration, the officer in command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best manner possible. 
Section 8.3.11 - State Minimum Fire Safety Standards. 
The City of Roswell hereby adopts the state minimum fire safety standards pursuant to O.C.G.A § 25-2-12 which standards are specified in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to such chapter. 
Additionally, the city hereby adopts the Georgia Standard Fire Prevention Code (International Fire Code) as adopted by the State of Georgia and as amended from time to time. The City of Roswell further adopts Chapter 1 Administration, Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix D of the Fire Prevention Code with the following modifications: 
(a)  Sections 103.1, 103.2, 103.3 and 108 are deleted in their entirety. 
(b)  Section 109.3 add: (Specify Offense - misdemeanor), (Amount - $1,000.00) and (Number of Days - one hundred eighty (180) days). 
(c)  Section 111.4 add: (Minimum Fine Amount $500.00) and (Maximum Fine Amount $1,000.00). 
(d)  Appendix D, Section D103: Minimum road width is changed from twenty-six (26) feet to twenty-four (24) feet. 
(e)  Appendix D, Section D103.4, Table D103.4: Cul-de-sac diameter is changed from ninety-six (96) feet to one hundred (100) feet and minimum road width is changed from twenty-six (26) feet to twenty-four (24) feet. 
(2002-02-01, Amended, 02/18/2002) 
Section 8.3.12 - Authority to Enforce Standards. 
The fire marshal and his deputies shall be Georgia registered or certified peace officers. The fire marshal's office shall be recognized by the State of Georgia through police office standards training as a law enforcement agency and shall be headed by the fire marshal. The fire marshal and his deputies shall have full authority of arrest and the ability to summons violators to court in all matters pertaining to the enforcement of the state of Georgia minimum fire safety standards and criminal investigations involving arson. 
Section 8.3.13 - Enforcement of State Minimum Fire Safety Standards. 
The fire marshal and his deputies shall have the responsibility to enforce the minimum fire safety standards with the exception of chapter 120-3-3.09, "Accessibility to and Use of Public Facilities by Persons with Disabilities" and chapter 120-3-3.10, "Parking Spaces Designation for Persons with Disabilities." The chief building official of the city's department of community development shall enforce such standards. 
( 2015-07-19 , Amended 07/27/2015) 
Section 8.3.14 - Determination of Hazardous Condition; Remedial Action. 
Should the fire marshal or his deputies deem any condition existing in the city to be in violation of the adopted minimum fire safety standards, they shall have the authority to command that said condition be remedied. The fire marshal shall keep or cause to be kept a record of all inspections, as to their location, date, recommendations made and all follow-up actions. 
Section 8.3.15 - Closing of Buildings/Businesses or Job Sites. 
The fire marshal or deputy fire marshals shall furnish the developer, builder, contractor, building owner and/or business owner who violated the minimum fire safety standards and/or who fails to perform satisfactory work, a written list of violations of the code or standard. If the developer, builder, contractor, building owner and/or business owner does not correct the violation, the fire marshal or deputy fire marshal with fire marshal or fire chief approval, may close down the job and/or have the work thereon stopped and/or preclude use of the building until the cited deficiencies are corrected. 
Section 8.3.16 - Emergency Closings. 
Under emergency situations and in the best interest of public safety the fire marshal and/or fire chief or deputy fire marshal with approval of the fire marshal or fire chief may close a business or building due to life threatening violations of the minimum fire safety standards. This may be done without prior notice of violations. 
Section 8.3.17 - Appeals from Determinations of Fire Marshal. 
Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application, revokes or suspends a permit due to unsatisfactory work, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the minimum fire safety standards do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the codes or standards have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the fire chief. 
If the aggrieved party does not agree with the decision of the fire chief an appeal may be made through the fire marshal to the state fire marshal's office. The developer, builder, contractor, building owner and/or business owner shall do no work on the structure and/or the building owner or business owner use the building without the approval of the fire marshal and/or the chief while the appeal is pending. If the state fire marshal's office finds the violations of the code and/or unsatisfactory work of the developer, builder, contractor, building owner and/or business owner to be true, the suspension of work and/or closing of a building or buildings ordered by the fire chief and/or fire marshal shall be continued and the developer's, builder's, and/or contractor's right to secure further permits to do work in the city revoked until the developer, builder and/or contractor presents evidence to the fire marshal and/or chief of the fire and rescue department that he, she and/or it can and will perform work which complies with the minimum fire safety standards. Further, if the state fire marshal's office finds that a building owner and/or business owner has violated the provisions of the minimum fire safety standards, such building or buildings will not be used until the deficiencies have been corrected to the satisfaction of the fire marshal and/or the fire chief. 
Section 8.3.18 - Variances on New and Existing Construction. 
Variances in the minimum fire safety standards in existing buildings may be granted by the Roswell fire marshal pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(e)(2). Variances shall be as nearly equivalent as practical to the standards in question. 
Variances in the minimum fire safety standards in the construction of new buildings are the responsibility of the state fire safety commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(e)(4). 
Section 8.3.19 - Reserved. 
Section 8.3.20 - Violations and Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the state minimum fire safety standards adopted in this article or who shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate of permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire and rescue department and/or by the mayor and the council of the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Each such violation or failure to comply shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, by imprisonment not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days and community service in the City of Roswell for period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, either or both such fine, imprisonment or work on the streets or public works, in the discretion of the municipal court judge and as provided in section 1.1.3. 
(c)  The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The application of the penalty prescribed in subsection (b) shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or maintenance of an abatement action. 
Section 8.3.21 - Civil Remedies and Penalties. 
In addition to any fines or penalties provided for herein, any person who willfully violates any provisions of this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day that the violation continues to exist. The violating party shall also be liable to the City of Roswell for the costs incurred and damages suffered by the city, its agents and agencies as a direct and proximate result of such violation(s). 
In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of such conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the danger to public health and safety, and the corrective action, if any, taken by the defendant. 
Section 8.3.22 - Duties of Spectators. 
Every spectator who shall be present at a fire or emergency scene shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command at such fire or emergency scene, and any person refusing to obey such orders shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum not exceeding $200.00, provided no person shall be bound to obey any such officer, unless such officer's official character shall be made known to such person. 
Section 8.3.23 - Enforcement of Ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of police officers of the city to see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist, or refuse to obey any such officer in the discharge of his duty. 
Section 8.3.24 - Water Supplies to Single-Family Dwellings. 
Private property that is subdivided for more than one (1) single-family residence and is located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the nearest fire hydrant shall be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler protection designed in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Standard 13D as adopted by the State of Georgia. Plans shall be submitted and approved by the fire marshal's office. 
Section 8.3.25 - Entrance Gates and Chains. 
Gates or devices restricting fire department access to residential or commercial buildings or recreation areas shall comply with the requirements of the fire marshal's office before installation. 
Section 8.3.26 - Service Outside Corporate Limits. 
Members of the fire and rescue department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of rendering aid to other fire departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering aid in the case of accidents. Provided, however, the fire department shall not render such service outside the corporate limits except upon orders of the fire chief, the deputy chief, or the mayor. Where the city has undertaken by contract to render service to property outside the corporate limits the fire and rescue department may leave the corporate limits in the fulfillment of such contract. 
Article 8.4 - Police Protection 

Section 8.4.1 - Police Department. 
The police department shall be composed of the chief of police and any police officers or other employees as may be necessary. Its purpose is to enforce City of Roswell ordinances, and county, state and federal law within its jurisdiction so as to maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city. Enforcement powers shall include the arrest and prosecution for any violation of such laws. The police department may be assisted by others as may be authorized by mayor and council, or as provided in any duly executed intergovernmental contract or mutual aid agreement. 
Section 8.4.2 - Chief of Police; Acting Chief. 
Under the general direction of the city administrator, the chief of police will direct the administration and operation of all services of the City of Roswell Police Department and shall establish the policies, directives, rules and regulations for the administration and operations of the department. The chief is the executive officer of the department and shall ensure that all laws, both state and federal, ordinances and regulations are enforced and that life and property are protected. The chief shall monitor the daily functions of all divisions including administration, uniform patrol, criminal investigation, and support services. His responsibilities shall include overseeing accreditation and training, supervising operations, and reviewing decisions related to hiring, disciplining, and evaluation of department personnel. 
In the chief's absence from the city or when for any reason the chief of police is unable to attend to the duties of his office, he shall designate a person to be acting chief and such designated person shall assume the duties of the chief of police for such designated time. 
Section 8.4.3 - Oversight by Public Safety and Public Works Committee. 
The Public Safety and Public Works Committee shall oversee the operation of the police department. The police chief shall serve as a liaison to such committee and make periodic reports as requested. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007; 2006-02-02, Amended, 02/06/2006) 
Section 8.4.4 - Operations Manual. 
The police department shall be operated in accordance with The Roswell Police Department Employee Manual , adopted May 1, 1995, as amended from time to time. The Roswell Police Department Employee Manual as amended is hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(2006-02-02, Amended, 02/06/2006) 
Section 8.4.5 - Patrol Powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk, or park in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the city limits if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
Section 8.4.6 - Compensation for Testifying. 
Any law enforcement officer subpoenaed by the recorder's court of the City of Roswell will be entitled to compensation from the City of Roswell for his or her appearance at a court session when such officer attends in an off-duty status. 
Section 8.4.7 - Abuse of Position. 
(a)  No police officer shall use his official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)  For personal or financial gain; 
(2)  For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  For avoiding consequences of illegal acts. 
(b)  Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the chief. 
Section 8.4.8 - Endorsements and Referrals. 
Police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an attorney, ambulance, towing service, bondsman, mortician or the like. In the case of ambulance or towing service, when such service is necessary and the person needing the services is unable or unwilling to procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
Article 8.5 - Loitering 

Section 8.5.1 - Loitering. 
(a)  A person may not loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in a manner so as to: 
1.  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
2.  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress. 
(b)  When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing the conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey the orders violates this section. 
(c)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to a fine or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 
Section 8.5.2 - Halting or Impeding Flow of Traffic. 
No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place when ordered by the police of the City of Roswell and/or any other authorized law enforcement official. 
Section 8.5.3 - Sitting or Lying on Streets. 
A person shall not sit, lie or sleep in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk or other place open for pedestrian travel, except when necessitated by physical disability of such person. 
Section 8.5.4 - Urban Camping and Improper Use of Property. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance: 
Camp shall mean residing in or using a public street, sidewalk, or park for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for any substantial prolonged period of time; regularly cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Public park includes all municipal parks, public play grounds, public plazas, attractions, and monuments. 
Public street includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
Storing personal property shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for any substantial prolonged length of time. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public Parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any park, as defined above, owned by the City of Roswell. 
(c)  Other Public Property—Blocking Ingress and Egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, to sleep, to store personal property, to sit or to lie down on any public property so as to interfere with ingress or egress from buildings. 
(d)  Private Property. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner, a leaseholder, or other rightful occupant to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(e)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this code section until he or she has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he or she is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(f)  Exceptions. This code section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons in wheelchairs sitting on sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals, concerts, fireworks, or other special events; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(9)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provision of meals; or 
(10)  Children sleeping while being carried in a stroller or baby carriage. 
Section 8.5.5 - Defecating or Urinating on Public Property or in Public Areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on the streets or sidewalks, or in the halls or elevators of public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to view in the City of Roswell. 
Section 8.5.6 - Day Labor Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(a)  Pick up or hire day laborers on private property without the permission of the property owner; or 
(b)  Assemble on private property for the purpose of soliciting work as a day laborer without the permission of the property owner and after having been directed to cease such action by the property owner or other lawful authority. 
Sections 8.5.7, 8.5.8 - Reserved. 
Section 8.5.9 - Loitering by Minors. 
(a)  [Unlawful.] It is unlawful for a minor as defined herein, to loiter in any public place within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, subject to the definitions and exceptions contained in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Loiter means to stand idly about or linger aimlessly. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, highways, private residences left open to the public without the presence of adult supervisors and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, malls, parking lots, office buildings, playgrounds, vacant lots and transportation facilities. 
Youth means any person under the age of eighteen (18) and is synonymous with the terms "juvenile" or "minor" for the purposes of this chapter. 
(c)  [Exceptions.] This chapter shall not apply under the following circumstances to minors: 
(1)  Emancipated pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 19-7-1 et seq. or similar statutes of another state; 
(2)  Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of said minor; 
(3)  Upon a specific, legitimate errand at the direction of a parent or guardian having the care or custody of a minor, while such minor is actually and directly carrying out such errand; 
(4)  Going directly to or coming directly from a place of public amusement, school function, or place of employment, with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian; 
(5)  Present in a public place because of an emergency, as defined herein, while actually dealing with or responding to such emergency. 
Article 8.6 - Clean Indoor Air Ordinance 

Section 8.6.1 - Short Title of Article. 
This article known as the Fulton County Clean Indoor Air Ordinance is herein adopted in its entirety by the City of Roswell. 
Section 8.6.2 - Findings and Purpose. 
(a)  Numerous studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States and recent reports of the Environmental Protection Agency, have shown that secondhand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in healthy nonsmokers; a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and particularly harmful to children, elderly people, and allergic individuals. 
(b)  Accordingly, the mayor and council of the City of Roswell in accord with the Fulton County Board of Commissioners find and declare that the purpose of this article is to protect the public health and welfare by regulating smoking in public places and places of employment. 
Section 8.6.3 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means: 
(1)  An enclosed and/or separate area which is primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages, wine, malt beverages, and/or distilled spirits, for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages; and 
(2)  Any adult entertainment premises as defined by chapter 18, article III of this Code. Although a food service establishment may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the food service establishment dining area. The terms wine, malt beverages, and distilled spirits are defined in chapter 3 of this Code. 
Designated smoking area (in a food service establishment) means an area of contiguous seating where smoking is permitted and which is situated so existing barriers and ventilation systems are used to minimize the toxic effects of smoke, is marked by appropriate signs, and does not include service lines or cashier areas. 
Designated smoking area (in all other establishments) means any enclosed indoor area in which smoking is permitted. Such smoking area shall be clearly designated and separate from any area in which smoking is not permitted. In a place of employment, the designated smoking area shall be separate from a smokefree work area by floor to ceiling walls or ventilation technology effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smokefree area other than portable air cleaning devices; provided, however, that no restrooms or employee lounges shall be designated smoking areas. 
Dining area means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
Employer means any person, partnership, associate, corporation, or nonprofit entity which employs one (1) or more persons, including the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of Fulton County government and any city governments located in Fulton County. 
Food service establishment means any establishment for the preparation and serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes, restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias (both public and private), food carts, industrial cafeterias, catering establishments, food vending vehicles, and operations connected therewith, and similar facilities by whatever name called. The term "food service establishment" shall not mean an establishment which does not provide seating or facilities for consumption of food on premises or a "food sales establishment" as that term is defined elsewhere in this Code. The term "food service establishment" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a bar, as defined in this section. The term "food service establishment" shall not include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or child care facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as food service establishments under this article. When determining food service establishment seating capacity, outdoor seating will not be included in the total number. 
Health department means the Fulton County Health Department. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, employee lounges, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. 
(1)  A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a food service establishment shall not be treated as a place of employment under this article. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, offices, waiting rooms, lobbies, public transit, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, theaters, sports arenas, service lines, airports, and meeting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care facility or a health care facility. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store in which the sale of tobacco products designed for smoking comprises more than fifty (50) percent of its receipts. 
Service line means any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. 
Sports arena means enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
Tobacco business means a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, or other enterprise, in which the primary activity is the sale, manufacture, or promotion, of tobacco, tobacco products, accessories, and in which the sale, manufacture, or promotion of other products is merely incidental. 
Work area means an area in a place of employment where one (1) or more employees are routinely assigned and perform services for their employer. 
Section 8.6.4 - Penalty for Violation of Article. 
Any person who smokes or any person who allows smoking in violation of this article, or any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Offenses shall be punishable as provided in section 1.1.3 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
Section 8.6.5 - Regulation of Smoking. 
(a)  Smoking in Public Places. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places within the incorporated limits of the City of Roswell. 
(b)  Smoking in Places of Employment. Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking in all places of employment is prohibited in the following manner: 
(1)  Smoking shall be prohibited in auditoriums, gymnasiums, restrooms, elevators, classrooms, hallways, employee medical facilities, and rooms or areas which contain photocopying equipment or other office equipment used in common, and in company vehicles occupied by more than one (1) person unless the occupants of such vehicle agree that smoking may be permitted. 
(2)  Smoking shall be prohibited in conference rooms and meeting rooms, unless everyone in that room agrees that smoking may be permitted. 
Notwithstanding the above prohibitions, employers in places of employment shall provide nonsmoking employees with a smokefree work area, and provide for contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms. The contiguous nonsmoking areas in employee cafeterias and lunchrooms shall be sufficient to meet employee demand. An employer may not determine that no such demand exists. The employer shall not be required to make any expenditures or structural changes to create a smokefree work area. In the event an employer cannot, after using its best efforts, comply with an employee's request for a smokefree work area, the employer shall designate that employee's work area as a smokefree work area. 
Section 8.6.6 - Government Complex Declared a No Smoking Area. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, the entire Roswell City Hall building, the area within twenty (20) feet of the main entrance to Roswell City Hall and the Fulton County government complex, including the atrium, are designated as no smoking areas. 
Section 8.6.7 - Exceptions. 
The regulation of smoking pursuant to this article shall not apply in the following areas: 
(a)  Private homes, private residences, and private automobiles. 
(b)  Bars. 
(c)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, except for those rooms designated by such hotels and motels as no smoking rooms. 
(d)  Retail tobacco stores and tobacco businesses. 
(e)  A designated smoking area in a food service establishment, provided that such designated smoking area shall not comprise more than fifty (50) percent of a food service establishment's seating capacity. 
(f)  A designated smoking area in a place of employment, except that no designated smoking area shall be permitted in any health care or child care facility. 
(g)  Work areas in any place of employment so long as the work area is exclusively occupied by smokers; everyone in the work area reaches an agreement that smoking may be permitted; the work area is not subject to regular entrance by the public or nonsmokers; and the work area is separate from a smokefree work area by floor to ceiling walls or some other means, equally effective in reducing the effects of smoke on the smokefree work area, other than portable air cleaning devices. 
(h)  A designated smoking area in a public place. 
(i)  Banquet or meeting rooms when these rooms are being used for private functions. 
(j)  Persons residing within longterm care facilities, as that term is defined by state law, so long as the resident does not interfere with the rights of others or unless prior to admission the resident, guardian, or representative is informed of written admission policies which limit or ban smoking. 
(k)  Wholly or partially enclosed private boxes in indoor sports arenas and in such designated smoking areas of the sports arena which areas shall not include the arena's seating space or the activity floor of such sports complex. 
(l)  Limousines under private hire by an individual or corporation. 
Section 8.6.8 - Declaration of Smokefree Environment. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed, interpreted, or construed to restrict or prohibit any person in charge of any public place or place of employment from designating that place a smokefree facility and prohibiting smoking in areas which otherwise would be permitted by this article. 
Section 8.6.9 - Posting of Signs. 
(a)  Because ordinances regulating smoking are primarily self-enforcing, adequate signage is important. 
(b)  Signs reading "smoking," "no smoking," or the international symbol for "no smoking," consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar across it, whichever is appropriate, shall be conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is regulated by this article by the person in charge of such facility. Such signs shall be configured as follows: a minimum size requirement of four inches by four inches and containing letters of not less than one (1) inch in height. 
(c)  Every food service establishment shall have posted at each entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and that smoking is allowed only in the designated smoking area. 
Section 8.6.10 - Enforcement of Article. 
(a)  Although smoking ordinances are primarily self-regulating, enforcement of this article shall be the ultimate responsibility of the Fulton County Department of Health. 
(b)  The department of health may initiate any action to seek enforcement of this article on its own motion or upon information provided by any citizen. Any officer of the City of Roswell Police Department also may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in his/her presence. Any other police officer or code enforcement officer whose jurisdiction is located within Roswell may initiate an action for violation of this article if a violation occurs in his/her presence, provided that the violation occurs within that officer's jurisdiction. 
(c)  Any owner, operator, or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of this article's provisions. 
(d)  In any dispute arising under this article, the need to breathe smokefree air shall be given precedence over the need to smoke. 
Section 8.6.11 - Other Applicable Laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws, regulations, or policies. 
Section 8.6.12 - Severability. 
If any portion of this article or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this article shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
Article 8.7 - Air Pollution Control 

Section 8.7.1 - Authority for this Article. 
In agreement with the federal "Air Quality Act of 1967" (P.L. 90-148) and with the Georgia Air Quality Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1) and by the authority vested in the city council by law, this article is hereby established. 
Section 8.7.2 - Purpose of this Article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards or regulations in conjunction with state and federal law to safeguard life, health, property and the public welfare of the citizens of the city and others from the effects of air pollution and air contamination. 
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.) establishes procedures to protect and improve air quality and to control emissions. 
Section 8.7.3 - Open Burning. 
(a)  When Permitted. Open burning is prohibited except for open burning under the following circumstances and conditions: 
(1)  Open burning in a reasonable fashion for the purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption is allowed; and 
(2)  Bonfires, recreation fires or fires used for promoting an outdoor event are allowed, provided fires in excess of three (3) feet across are subject to permitting by the fire department; and 
(3)  Warming fires in barrels of fifty-five-gallon capacity or less are allowed at construction sites, provided that the outside temperature is fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit or less and the fire does not produce dense smoke or obnoxious odors. Untreated wood or lumber shall be the only material or substance allowed in a warming fire. Warming fires must be attended and are authorized only at sites where no certificate of occupancy has been issued. It is specifically declared the responsibility of all city building inspectors and other enforcement personnel to assist the fire marshal in the regulation and enforcement of these warming fire provisions; and 
(4)  Fires set for purposes of training firefighting personnel of the city are allowed. 
(b)  Burning under Hazardous Conditions. The fire marshal may prohibit any open burning when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such burning hazardous. 
(c)  Liability of Applicant. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the liability of the landowner/applicant for any damages caused as a result of fire. 
(2000-01-01, Added, 01/03/2000) 
Section 8.7.4 - Prohibited Acts. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other materials which cause injury, detriment, nuisance, or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public, or which endanger the comfort, repose, health, or safety of any such person or the public, or which cause, or have a natural tendency to cause, injury or damage to humans or property. 
Section 8.7.5 - Materials Handling; Construction and Demolition. 
(a)  Any material which may create air pollution as the result of dispersal during transport shall be so treated prior to transport or so enclosed during transport, as to effectively prevent air pollution during transport. 
(b)  Effective measures shall be employed to prevent air pollution resulting from the dispersal of materials from premises, from stockpiles or from accumulations incidental to manufacture, handling or storage. 
(c)  Effective measures shall be applied to prevent air pollution resulting from the demolition of buildings or equipment, the clearing of land, the preparation of sites for construction or from the construction of buildings or the installation of equipment. 
Section 8.7.6 - Notice of Violation. 
Should a code enforcement officer, building inspector or other authorized person find the violation of any provision of this regulation to exist, he shall give notice of the violation in writing to the person responsible, specifying the nature of the violation and a reasonable time for correcting it. Delivery of the notice may be effected by mail or by personal delivery. 
Section 8.7.7 - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of, or who fails to perform any duty imposed by, this article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1.1.3 and, in addition thereto, may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
Article 8.8 - Nuisances 

Section 8.8.1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to exercise the police power in relation to public nuisances and abatement of such nuisances, to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote the economic development of the city. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent and prohibit those conditions which reduce the value of private property, interfere with enjoyment of public and private property, create and constitute fire and other safety and health hazards, and generally create a menace to the health and welfare of the public and contribute to the degradation of the character of neighborhoods and depreciation of property values. It is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare to regulate, prevent and prohibit conditions which may constitute disorderly, disturbing, unsafe, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring and/or disease-causing places, conditions or objects. It is also necessary for the public social and economic welfare to regulate, prevent and prohibit conditions that degrade the city's scenic attractiveness and livability and its economic development. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts and magistrate courts have jurisdiction to order the abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Section 8.8.2 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, shall have the following meanings: 
Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer, in his/her judgment, determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
Blighted property means any property on which there exists any one (1) or more of the following conditions or activities: 
(1)  A building or structure that is not occupied, inhabited, used, or secured. For purposes of this chapter, a building or structure is unsecured when it is unlocked or the public can gain entry without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  Any partially constructed, reconstructed or demolished building or structure upon which work is abandoned. Work is deemed abandoned when there is no valid and current building or demolition permit or when there has not been any substantial work on the project for six (6) months. 
(3)  Property which is in an unsecured state so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children, a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or other unauthorized persons, or so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful act. 
(4)  Any building or other structure which by reason of rot, weakened joints, walls, floors, underpinning, roof, ceilings, or insecure foundation, or other cause has become dilapidated or deteriorated. 
(5)  Any building or other structure with exterior walls and/or roof coverings that have become so deteriorated as to not provide adequate weather protection and be likely to, or have resulted in, termite infestation or dryrot. 
(6)  Buildings or structures including, but not limited to, walls, windows, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, or walkways which are obsolete, broken, deteriorated, or substantially defaced to the extent that the disrepair visually impacts on neighboring property or presents a risk to public safety. For purposes of this chapter "defaced" includes, but is not limited to, writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti" and peeling, flaking, blistering, or otherwise deteriorated paint. 
(7)  Property which is not kept clean and sanitary and free from all accumulations of offensive matter or odor including, but not limited to, dead or decayed trees, tree limbs, weeds or other vegetation that is not maintained in a manner consistent with the neighborhood and does not exceed a maximum of ten (10) inches, or grass in excess of ten (10) inches, dead organic matter, rubbish, junk, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or otherwise hazardous liquids and substances. 
(8)  Property which constitutes a fire hazard or a condition considered dangerous to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(9)  Property which is likely to or does harbor rats or other vermin, feral pets, or other non-domesticated animal nuisances. 
(10)  Property which substantially detracts from the aesthetic and economic values of neighboring properties including, but not limited to, personal property and wares and foodstuffs, premises garbage and refuse receptacles, and commercial and industrial business activities which are inadequately buffered from any street, sidewalk, or other publicly trafficked area or such buffering which is inadequately maintained. 
(11)  Landscaping which is inadequately maintained or which is not installed as required by city codes of any permit issued in accordance with such codes provided landscaping may include approved areas such as undisturbed buffers, natural islands and/or stream corridors that are left in a natural state. 
(12)  Matter including, but not limited to, smoke, odors, dust, dirt, debris, fumes, and sprays which is permitted to be transported by wind or otherwise upon any street, course, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, or other public or private property and which is determined to be a violation of federal, state, regional, or local air quality regulations. 
(13)  Property including, but not limited to, building facade, window, doorway, driveway, walkway, fence, wall, landscaped planter or area, sidewalk, curb and gutter, and edge of street pavement on which dirt, litter, vegetation, garbage, refuse, debris, flyers, or circulars have accumulated. 
(14)  Property on which a swimming pool, pond, stream, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. "Polluted water" is defined for the purpose of this chapter, as water which contains bacterial growth, remains of garbage, refuse, debris, papers and any other foreign matter or material which constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition. 
(15)  Parking lots, driveways, paths, and other areas used or intended to be used for commercial and industrial business activities including, but not limited to, selling, manufacturing, processing, packaging, fabricating, treating, dismantling, processing, transferring, handling, transporting, storing, compounding, or assembling which are inadequately maintained and pose a risk of harm to public health or safety including, but not limited to, unpaved surfaces which generate fugitive dust and paved surfaces with cracks, potholes, or other breaks. 
(16)  Property which is not securely fenced or adequately lighted to prevent illegal access and activity related to the dumping of garbage, waste, debris and litter. 
(17)  Property having a topography, geology, or configuration which, as a result of grading operations, erosion control, sedimentation control work, or other improvements to said property, causes erosion, subsidence, unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage problems as to harm or pose a risk of harm to adjacent properties, 
(18)  Property whereon any condition or object obscures the visibility of public street intersections to the public so as to constitute a hazard, including but not limited to, landscaping, fencing, signs, posts, or equipment. 
(19)  Conditions which due to their accessibility to the public pose a hazard including, but not limited to, unused and broken equipment, abandoned wells, shafts, or basements, hazardous or unprotected pools, ponds, or excavations, structurally unsound fences or structures, machinery which is inadequately secured or protected, lumber, trash, fences or debris that may pose a hazard to the public, storage of chemicals, gas, oil, or toxic or flammable liquids. 
Junk means and includes the storage of all old appliances, equipment or parts thereof, all old iron or other scrap metal, all inoperable vehicles or parts thereof, including tires, all vehicle hulks, cardboard, all lumber, old wood and mattresses, which items are not being used for their intended purpose, and does not include orderly stacked firewood. 
Litter means and includes all waste material, including, but not limited to, disposable packages or containers thrown or deposited on public or private property, including the depositing on public property or cars of handbills, but not including the waste of primary process of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel, real estate, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Refuse means vegetable offal, animal offal, discarded food, cans, bottles, waste paper, and all other waste substances from private and public establishments and from residences, but shall not include small amounts of weeds, twigs, grass or other material resulting from the normal tending of lawns and gardens. 
Responsible person means any agent, lessee, owner or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises. 
Rubbish means and includes combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, hay, straw, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust. The term shall also include animal feed and the products of and residue from animal quarters. 
Vegetable growth and horticultural growth means and includes but are not limited to trees, plants, shrubs, bushes, flowers, garden vegetables, weeds and grasses and further includes all growth of every kind and character, whether domestic or wild, causing, the obstruction or interference or detriment prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-09, § 1, 08/04/2008; 2006-09-19, Amended, 09/11/2006) 
Section 8.8.3 - Types of Nuisances. 
Each of the following places, conditions or things is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the code enforcement officer determines that any of these conditions exist upon any premises, the officer may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this article: 
(a)  The growing, maintaining, permitting or allowing of any weed, undergrowth, vegetable or horticultural growth which either: 
(1)  Overhangs, encroaches upon, obstructs or in any manner interferes with the full and free use by the public of any street, sidewalk or sidewalk area upon which such property so owned or occupied abuts; 
(2)  Has grown and died upon any premises owned, occupied or in control of the responsible person or persons and which constitutes the detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, a fire hazard; or 
(3)  Is so overgrown upon any premises owned, occupied, or in control of the responsible person or persons, as to cause the degradation of the character of the neighborhood as determined by code enforcement. This provision shall not apply to natural areas or landscape areas that are to be retained in a natural state and designated as such on building plans or approved site plans or to natural areas and pastures which have not been previously manicured or developed and are to be retained in a natural state. Natural areas, which are areas growing without human care or cultivated may typically include areas within designated setbacks, undisturbed buffers, stream corridors, landscape islands or corridors within submitted building plans or any area as determined and approved by the city landscape architect. For purposes of this section, pastures shall be a parcel of land of one acre or more in size where plants or grasses are grown in a natural state so as not to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  (1)  The presence of debris or other material on sidewalks or the public right-of-way which impedes safe passage or otherwise creates a hazardous condition; 
(2)  The filling or blocking of a drainage easement; 
(c)  The existence of any junk, litter or refuse within the city when written complaint from two (2) or more city residents who are impacted by the present or potential effect of the condition on them or their property, has been received by the city unless such materials are kept or stored in an orderly and sightly manner and so as not to create a fire, safety, health or sanitary hazard; 
(d)  The depositing, leaving or throwing away of any junk, litter or refuse within the city for an unreasonable length of time beyond what is necessary for proper disposal, except at the city landfill or in covered containers or receptacles acceptable to the enforcement officer of the city; 
(e)  The causing or permitting to be discharged, placed or thrown, or the throwing into, or upon any premises or any public street or alley of any nauseous, foul or putrid liquid or substance, or any liquid or substance likely to become nauseous, foul, offensive or putrid; 
(f)  The erection, continuance or use of any building, room, property or other place in the city for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacturer which results in offensive odors or other annoyances being released, and which annoys, injures or is offensive or detrimental to the health of the individuals there employed or residing, or to the public; 
(g)  The burning of refuse or other material in such a manner as to cause or permit the smoke, ashes, soot or gases arising from such burning to become discomforting or annoying, or to injure or endanger the health of any person or neighborhood; 
(h)  The maintenance or use of any building, house, room or other structure or vehicle for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution; 
(i)  Any pit, basin, hole, well or other excavation which is unguarded and dangerous to life, or has been abandoned, or is no longer used for the purpose for which it was constructed, or is maintained contrary to law; 
(j)  All obstructions to streets, rights-of-way or other public ways in the city, and all excavations in or under the same, which are by ordinance prohibited, or which may be made without lawful permission, or which, having been made by lawful permission, are kept and maintained after the purpose thereof has been accomplished, or for an unreasonable length of time; 
(k)  All premises, buildings and vehicles whereon or wherein intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bargained, exchanged, given away, furnished, disposed of, consumed or permitted to be consumed, in violation of laws of the state and in ordinances of the city; 
(l)  All vacant, unused or unoccupied buildings and structures within the city, which are allowed to become or remain open to entrance by unauthorized persons or the general public, because of broken, missing or open doors, windows or other openings, so that the same may be used by vagrants or other persons in a manner detrimental to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; 
(m)  All building, dwellings or property on which one (1) or more of the conditions listed in subsection 8.8.2(b) exist; 
(n)  Any refrigerator, ice box or deep freeze locker having a capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more or any other container manufactured, custom-made or homemade designed for storage which is discarded, abandoned or left in any place accessible to children and which has not had the door latching mechanism removed to prevent the latching or locking of the door; 
(o)  Any sign, poster or other advertising matter of any nature placed upon a telephone, utility or other poles, trees, sidewalks, streets, signs, traffic signs or other traffic control devices or other structures or places within streets, alleys or other public places or rights-of-way; 
(p)  All buildings or parts thereof, vehicles, or other structures, wherein any gambling may be found, and any gambling device may be found, except as licensed and within the scope of the requirement of the license required under state law and this municipal code; 
(q)  The depositing or allowing of irrigation or other water to run by any street, alley or other public place, in such manner as to cause settling or damage to the street, alley or other public place, or to cause annoyance, damage or hazard to any user of the street, alley or other public place; 
(r)  Animals which satisfy the conditions in section 8.1.13; 
(s)  Noise: creating unnecessary noise. 
Excessive and disturbing sound is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare, safety, and the quality of life. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive and disturbing sound may be substantially abated. People have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive and disturbing sound that may jeopardize their health, safety, or welfare or degrade the quality of life. 
In order to ensure attractive residential and commercial areas, it is necessary that an audibly satisfying environment be maintained. The City of Roswell is more likely to attract permanent residents and commercial enterprises if it controls and maintains appropriate noise quality and the residents will ultimately gain financial improvements and protection in their quality of life as a result of these regulations. 
(1)  Definitions. All terminology used in this article, not defined below, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. The following words and terms, when used in this Article, shall have the following meanings: 
A-weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
Background sound level is the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
Boom Box means any self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment capable of emitting sound. 
Boom Car means any vehicle with loudspeakers, amplifiers, radio receiving sets, musical instruments, phonographs or other equipment capable of producing, reproducing or emitting noise which is cast upon public property or private property. 
C-weighing sound level is the sound pressure level in sound level meters using the C-weighting network as specified in ANSI or its successor body documents for sound level meters. This level is postscripted dB(C) or dBC and captures a lower frequency sound. 
Commercial or business property category is all property which is used primarily for the sale of merchandise or goods, or for the performances of service, or for office or clerical work. 
Construction is any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration or similar action, or demolition of buildings or structures. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
dBC is the C-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Emergency is any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work is any work or action performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
Impulsive sound is a sound having duration of less than one second with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. 
Industrial or manufacturing property category is any property which is used primarily for manufacturing or processing. 
Institutional property category is any property which is used primarily for public purposes such as city hall or a city park. 
Legal holidays recognized by Roswell include New Years Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Day after Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. 
Muffler is a sound-dissipative device or system for attenuating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine where such a device is part of the normal configuration of the equipment. 
Multi-family dwelling is any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but not limited to, multifamily dwellings, multifamily apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes and flats. 
Noise is any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans or violates this Ordinance. 
Noise disturbance is any sound that (a) endangers the safety or health of any person, (b) disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (c) endangers personal or real property or violates this Ordinance. 
Noise nuisance is the making, continuing or causing to be made or continued acts which are done or accomplished or carried on in such a manner, or with such volume, intensity, or with continued duration so as to annoy, to distress, or to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person of reasonable nervous sensibilities within the vicinity or hearing thereof, or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of humans or animals, or so as to interfere with the physical well being of humans or animals, or so as to endanger or injure personal or real property except in the case of alerting persons to an emergency; or the operation of emergency vehicles; or motor vehicles while moving on a public right-of-way, public waterway, airport runway, or railway; or sounds produced by any governmental body in the performance of a governmental function; or sounds generated at a scheduled and permitted function, parade or outdoor celebration, or any violation of this Ordinance. 
Noise sensitive facility means any facility whose operations may be detrimentally impacted by excessive sound levels. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, and places of worship. 
Octave band is all the components in a sound spectrum whose frequencies are between two sine wave components separated by an octave. 
Public space property category is any real property or structures thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Real property line is the line, including its vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another. 
Receiving property is the area from which the measurement of sound pressure levels is being taken, provided said area is not within the property lines of the sound projecting property or within the confines of the sound projecting unit in properties with common ownership such as condominiums and/or apartments. 
Residential property category is all property on which people legally live. 
Sound level meter (SLM) is an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels conforming to Type 1 or Type 2 standards as specified in ANSI Standard S 1.4-1983 or the latest version thereof. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) is 20 multiplied by the logarithm, to the base ten, of the A-weighted measured sound pressure divided by the sound pressure associated with the threshold of human hearing, in units of decibels. 
Weekday is any day, Monday through Friday that is not a legal holiday. 
(2)  Sound level limitations. 
a.  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit a domestic animal or the operation of any sound source in such a manner as to create a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Table 1 when measured at or within the real property line of the receiving property. Such a sound source would constitute a noise disturbance. 
TABLE 1 Sound Level Limits by Receiving Property 

 
b.  If the noise is an impulsive sound, the fast response setting shall be used and the daytime (7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.) limits of Table 1 shall be increased by ten (10) dBA. 
(3)  Exemptions. 
a.  Noise generated from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events shall be exempt from these provisions. 
b.  The following are exempt from the sound level limits: 
1.  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
2.  Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building, provided such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its activation if the sound is not intermittent or ten (10) minutes if intermittent; 
3.  Noise from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) continuous minutes of its activation if the sound is not intermittent or ten (10) continuous minutes if the sound is intermittent; 
4.  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
5.  Noise resulting from any practice or performance sponsored by or associated with the educational process administered by a recognized institution of learning, including, but not limited to band, choir, and orchestral performances; 
6.  Carillons, chimes or unamplified bells while being used in conjunction with religious services between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m.; 
7.  Emergency work approved by the Chief Building Inspector of the City; 
8.  Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
9.  Events with amplified or un-amplified sound that are operating within the parameters set forth in an approved special events permit as defined in Article 14.3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, Georgia; 
10.  Organized band and/or sports league activity sponsored by a school or the City of Roswell that is otherwise in compliance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
11.  Noise that results from landscaping and lawn maintenance between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
12.  Noise that results from construction both private and commercial between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(4)  Restricted Uses and Activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (2) and the exceptions above, the following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below: 
a.  Non-commercial or non-industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in subsection (2). At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (2) do not apply to non-commercial or non-industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment, provided that all motorized equipment is operated with a functioning muffler. 
b.  Commercial or industrial power tools used for landscaping and yard maintenance shall be operated with a muffler. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall not be operated on a residential property or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a residential property line, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends, unless: 
1.  Such activities are deemed emergency work, or 
2.  Such activities meet the limits set forth in subsection (2). 
At all other times, the limits set forth in subsection (2) do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment. 
c.  Owners and the agents of owners of domesticated animals shall not permit any vocalizations (including barking, baying, howling, crying, or making any other noise) for more than ten (10) continuous minutes without interruption or more than thirty (30) minutes if intermittent. Each occurrence will result in a separate offense. 
d.  Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction equipment, including, but not limited to boom cars, shall not be operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet in any direction from the equipment between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. such equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet in any direction. 
e.  Boom boxes, or any similar device, shall not be operated in a public place or public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., such equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction. 
f.  No amplified sound or outdoor performances (with or without amplified sound) shall be permitted after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday or after 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday. For purposes of this section "outdoor performance" shall include activities conducted indoors or under a roof but open to the outside by means of open windows, doors, screens or other openings but excluding the normal opening and closing of doors for entry and exit. 
(5)  Code Enforcement Officers. 
a.  Where the provisions of this ordinance require the measurement of sound with the use of a sound level meter, Code Enforcement Officers or Police Officers of the City shall make such measurement. 
b.  Upon occurrence of a violation of this Article, Officers or police officers having jurisdiction in the area where the violation takes place, may issue a citation/summons for the violation returnable to the Municipal Court of Roswell. Penalties for violations of this Article will be governed by subsection (8). 
(6)  Procedures for the Determination of Sound Levels. 
a.  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rate. All noise measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the receiving property, unless otherwise directed in this ordinance or when directly observed by an officer. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this ordinance, noise measurements are measured on the A- weighted sound level or the C- weighted sound level as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
b.  A field check of meter calibration and batteries must be conducted before and after every set of measurements, and at least every hour as necessary. 
c.  Calculation of source sound levels shall conform with accepted practice established by ANSI. 
(7)  Requests for Temporary Relief or Stay. 
a.  Any person requesting temporary relief or a stay from the enforcement of this ordinance shall apply to the Zoning Administrator or designee for a special administrative permit for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. The Zoning Administrator or designee has discretion to consider and grant or deny the special administrative permit (with such conditions as may be warranted), if strict enforcement of this ordinance will result in exceptional and undue hardship to the applicant. 
b.  Applications for special administrative permits shall be on a form prescribed by the Zoning Administrator or designee which shall, among other matters, address the nature of the noise, attenuation measures, and the hardships to the applicant and others if the permit is not granted. 
c.  A special administrative permit may be revoked and the issuance of future permits withheld, if there is a: 
1.  Violation of any conditions of the permit; 
2.  Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or, 
3.  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the zoning administrator or designee in granting the permit. 
d.  No special administrative permit shall be granted for amplified sound. 
e.  No special administrative permit shall be authorized to delete, modify, or change in any manner any requirement imposed as a condition of zoning or as a condition of a special or conditional land use permit imposed by the city council. 
f.  Appeals of any special administrative permit decision made by the zoning administrator or designee shall be to the city council. 
(8)  Enforcement Procedures. 
a.  The City may prosecute noise related violations by issuance of a city ordinance violation citation: 
1.  to either the owner or occupier of the residential property from which the noise is generated. For purposes of this ordinance, when only a civil remedy is sought, any occupier of the property is considered to be the authorized agent of the owner, unless the owner affirmatively proves to the court that the occupier was not authorized to be upon the premises. For civil penalties, notice to the occupier is considered notice to the owner. 
2.  If the origin of the noise generated is a business, the violation citation may be issued in the name of the business (whether incorporated, a sole proprietorship, or a limited liability company), with service of the citation in the name of the business made upon the owner of the business, or a manager or agent of said business. In addition, the owner of the property upon which the business is located may also be served with a citation. 
3.  If the municipal court finds that this chapter has been violated, the offender cited may be punished as follows: 
(i)  First Offense: A civil penalty of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
(ii)  Second Offense: A civil penalty of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
(iii)  Any further offenses by a criminal penalty of a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 and/or incarceration up to six (6) months. 
b.  In addition to issuing a fine as provided, or in lieu thereof, the Municipal Court Judge may issue an order requiring immediate abatement of any sound source alleged to be in violation of this section. Failure to abate such noise results in contempt of court. 
c.  No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefore, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from other law. 
( Ord. No. 2014-12-14, § 1, 12/22/2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-05-06, § 1, 05/12/2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-05-05, § 1, 05/12/2014 ; Ord. No. 2008-08-09, § 2, 08/04/2008; 2006-09-19, Amended, 09/11/2006; 2005-03-02, Amended, 03/07/2005, Amended subsection (s); 2001-04-03, Amended, 04/16/2001) 
Section 8.8.4 - Prohibited Conduct. 
It is unlawful for any responsible person(s) to create, permit, maintain, suffer, carry on or allow, upon their premises, any of the acts or things declared by this chapter to be a public nuisance. Any person creating, keeping or maintaining a nuisance, or permitting, allowing or suffering any nuisance to be maintained, who neglects or fails to abate or remove the nuisance within twenty-four (24) hours next after so creating, keeping or maintaining the nuisance, or permitting, allowing or suffering the same to be maintained, shall, for each twenty-four (24) hours thereafter during which the nuisance is continued, be guilty of a separate violation of maintaining a public nuisance. 
Section 8.8.5 - Abatement—Order. 
(a)  Upon the discovery of a nuisance, the code enforcement officer may order the responsible person creating, keeping, maintaining or permitting the same to abate it, and in default thereof, to undertake the abatement on behalf of the city. At least seventy-two (72) hours before he commences abatement, save in those cases of immediate necessity, the officer shall notify the person creating, keeping, maintaining or permitting the nuisance, the property owner and any person in possession of the property, if known, of his intentions. The notice shall be served personally or by first class mail and shall describe with particularity the nature of the violation, the sections of this Code or other law which are being violated and specifying a reasonable time within which the abatement must be accomplished. The expenses of such abatement may be recoverable as provided in section 8.8.12. 
(b)  When written requests for abatement have been unsuccessful and demolition appears imminent the code enforcement official shall request the City of Roswell Community Development and Transportation Committee to consider authorizing an alternative such as city purchase, rehabilitation grant application or equivalent action. In addition to such other penalties as may be imposed a court entering a judgment of guilty to a charge of creating a public nuisance may order the abatement of the same on such terms and conditions as may be just and equitable. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-09, § 3, 08/04/2008; 2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007; 2006-09-19, Amended, 09/11/2006) 
Section 8.8.6 - Abatement—Immediate. 
Whenever any nuisance is within a public way or easement, or is of such a character and so situated that it can be abated without the invasion or destruction of property or the prejudice of any right, and the further continuance is likely to result in expense to the city or injury to any person or property, and the responsible person(s) cannot be contacted or refuse(s) to immediately abate the condition, the enforcement officer may abate and remove the nuisance summarily. The expenses of such abatement may be recoverable as provided in section 8.8.12. 
Section 8.8.7 - Abatement by City—Safeguards. 
In any case where a nuisance is to be abated by the enforcement officer, it shall be the duty of such officer to proceed with due care and without unnecessary destruction of property. He shall in all cases be authorized to employ such assistance and adopt such means as may be necessary to effect the entire abatement of the nuisance. 
Section 8.8.8 - Complaint of Nuisance. 
Any city official or at least two (2) unrelated inhabitants of the city may file a verified complaint of nuisance with the City of Roswell office of code enforcement. A code enforcement officer shall thereupon issue a citation to the offender to appear in municipal court which shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the existence of such nuisance, and if found to exist to order its abatement. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or a building inspector that any property, dwelling, building or structure is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property and/or person is in violation of this article. 
Section 8.8.9 - Determination that Dwelling, Building, or Property is Unfit. 
In addition to the nuisances declared in section 8.8.3, the judge may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if they find that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure or on such property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure or property; or the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, structures or property, or of other residents of such city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
In the event the judge or board determines that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the judge or board may, following notice and a hearing, order that such dwelling, building, structure or property be vacated and secured until repairs, demolition, clean-up or other required abatement is accomplished. 
Section 8.8.10 - Powers in Regard to Unfit Buildings, Structures or Property. 
The municipal court judge may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article including the following powers in addition to others herein granted, to: 
(a)  Investigate property conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures or property are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use; 
(b)  Administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(c)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(d)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(e)  Delegate any functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as necessary. 
State Law reference— Legislative findings regarding unfit buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Section 8.8.11 - Appropriations to Repair, Close or Demolish Unfit Buildings, Structures or Property. 
The city council is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in this article. 
Section 8.8.12 - Recovery of Costs for Abatement. 
The cost of abating, vacating and closing or removal or demolition or clean-up shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs incurred by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. 
The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, fences, walls or structures or clean-up of property only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city within thirty (30) days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum, in three (3) equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of such three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (2) of this subsection, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for abatement, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structure or clean-up of property as provided by O.C.G.A § 48-5-358 and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. article 3 of chapter 4 of title 48. 
Section 8.8.13 - General Penalty. 
Any person guilty of maintaining a nuisance as defined herein, or any person who fails to abate a nuisance after being ordered to do so, shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalty specified in section 1.1.3 in addition to any provided in this article. 
Article 8.9 - Handbill Distribution 

Section 8.9.1 - Purpose. 
Insofar as unsolicited handbills and flyers are constantly left on private premises and vehicles in public places, there is a problem with litter as such handbills are oftentimes blown into the streets and onto lawns and not retrieved. In addition to the litter problem created by handbill distribution, an accumulation of handbills is a signal to burglars or vandals that the residence is unoccupied. To that end, this article will set out guidelines for distribution of unsolicited handbills. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.2 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
Handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, flyer or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
(1)  Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, business, opportunity or thing; or 
(2)  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken; or 
(4)  While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Private premises: Any dwelling house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place: Any street, sidewalk, boulevard, alley or other public way and any public park, square, space, ground or building. 
Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.3 - Inhabited Private Premises—Depositing Handbills; Insignia. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any inhabited private premises if the mailbox is specifically marked with the identifying insignia (City of Roswell green sticker) which signifies the occupant does not wish to receive handbills. The identifying insignia is to be posted on the bottom right corner of the mailbox door. The insignia will be green, state handbills with the universal insignia for no superimposed over "handbills," and identify the enforcing ordinance, to wit: 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.4 - Scattering Prohibited; Manner of Depositing Handbills. 
Unless inhabited private premises are posted, as provided in section 8.9.3, or unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, the person distributing the handbills may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is placed or deposited in a manner reasonably designed to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.5 - Prohibitions; Public Places; Vacant Premises; Vehicles; Exemptions. 
(a)  No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to any person willing to receive it. 
(b)  No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are vacant and which could be reasonably ascertained to be vacant. 
(c)  No person shall throw, post or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receivers thereof, a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(d)  Handbills for political, charitable and other nonprofit purposes are exempt from this article; however, if a newspaper is directly notified that a citizen does not wish to receive it, such request must be honored, or further distribution will be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.6 - Lampposts, Public Utility Poles, Trees, Public Structures. 
No person shall post or affix any handbill, notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole, tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.7 - Violation. 
(a)  If any handbill is found on any public or private premises or vehicle in violation of this article, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person or persons whose name(s), address(es) or telephone number(s) appear thereon has violated this article. 
(b)  The person who throws or deposits such handbills may also be charged with a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Section 8.9.8 - Penalties. 
(a)  Anyone convicted of violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties set forth in section 1.1.3 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Any continuing violation of this article resulting in the unlawful littering of the streets or sidewalks of the City of Roswell shall be deemed a nuisance and on conviction thereof by the Municipal Court of Roswell, the mayor and council may revoke the business license of the violator. 
(c)  Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Each location at which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Article 8.10 - Park Police Agency 

Section 8.10.1 - Park Police. 
The park police agency shall be composed of any officers or other employees as may be necessary. Its purpose is to enforce City of Roswell ordinances, and county, state and federal law within its jurisdiction so as to maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city. Enforcement powers shall include but are limited to the arrest and prosecution for any violation of such laws within the City of Roswell and/or as otherwise provided by state law. The park police agency may be assisted by other agencies as may be required and shall operate under the recreation and parks department. The park police agency shall be directed and administered by an agency head who shall meet all P.O.S.T. requirements for such position. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Section 8.10.2 - Oversight by Public Safety and Public Works Committee. 
The administrative and finance and recreation and parks committee shall oversee the operation of the park police agency. The director of parks and recreation shall serve as a liaison to such committee and make periodic reports as requested. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Section 8.10.3 - Patrol Powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the park police agency shall have the authority to patrol over any area of the city, but shall focus on park areas within the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the city limits if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  No park police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Section 8.10.4 - Compensation for Testifying. 
Any law enforcement officer subpoenaed by the recorder's court of the City of Roswell will be entitled to compensation from the City of Roswell for his or her appearance at a court session when such officer attends in an off-duty status. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Section 8.10.5 - Abuse of Position. 
(a)  No park police officer shall use his official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)  For personal or financial gain; 
(2)  For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  For avoiding consequences of illegal acts. 
(b)  Park police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the chief. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Section 8.10.6 - Endorsements and Referrals. 
Park police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an attorney, ambulance, towing service, bondsman, mortician or the like. In the case of ambulance or towing service, when such service is necessary and the person needing the services is unable or unwilling to procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
( 2015-09-26 , § 1, Added 09/16/2015) 
Chapter 9 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
Article 9.1 - City Owned Historic Property 

Section 9.1.1 - Property Management. 
The use and operation of any historic property presently owned by the City of Roswell or hereafter acquired shall be the responsibility of the director of recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs of the City of Roswell or his designee. The director shall insure that such properties are properly maintained and used in a manner that befits their historic character. 
( 2019-02-09 , § 1, Amended 02/11/2019; 2003-12-32, Renumbered, 12/08/2003) 
State Law reference— Local governing bodies may enact ordinances to provide for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historic properties or historic districts, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 
Section 9.1.2 - Submission to Historic Preservation Commission Required for Structural Change or Major Modification. 
Prior to undertaking any changes to an historical property that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness, the city shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission of the proposed changes and allow the commission forty-five (45) days to comment. Recommendations of the commission shall not be binding on the city unless in the commission's opinion the proposed changes would threaten the historical integrity of the structure in question. 
(2003-12-32, Renumbered, 12/08/2003) 
Section 9.1.3 - Sale of Historic Property. 
The city may condition the sale of any city owned historic property in such a manner that the purchaser and any successors in interest adequately protect and preserve the present state of the historic property. Such conditions may include the uses to which the property may be put. 
(2003-12-32, Renumbered, 12/08/2003) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES, TAXES & BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Article 10.1 - Ad Valorem Taxes[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. regulate the ad valorem taxation of property. 

Section 10.1.1 - Ad Valorem Rate. 
The tax ad valorem rate for each year shall be annually set by resolution of mayor and council. 
Section 10.1.2 - Ad Valorem Tax Due and Delinquent Dates—Specified. 
The ad valorem taxes due the city shall become due and payable at the time such tax bills are mailed which shall be in October of each year. Taxes may be paid at any time up to and until sixty (60) days after mailing without a penalty. Payments received after such time shall be delinquent. 
Charter reference— See § 4.11. 
Section 10.1.3 - Same—Delinquency Penalty. 
Any person failing to make a tax return of his property on or before April 1 of each year shall be assessed ten (10) percent of the amount of taxes due the city as a penalty. Said penalty shall be in addition to the amount of taxes due the city and also in addition to the fi. fa. costs and interest. 
Section 10.1.4 - Collection of Delinquent Taxes. 
(a)  The duty to collect by levy and sale or otherwise for delinquent taxes is hereby imposed upon the city clerk or the deputy city clerk as issuing officer, and the chief of police as execution officer. All levies of execution for delinquent taxes shall be in the name of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk or the deputy city clerk, with respect to delinquent city ad valorem taxes, to: 
(1)  Keep a file of all newspapers in which an official advertisement appears; 
(2)  Keep an execution docket in which shall be entered a full description of all executions; 
(3)  Maintain a book of all sales; 
(4)  Maintain an index to the sales and executions. 
(c)  The city clerk or the deputy city clerk shall sign all levies, notices, advertisements and the like in his name for the city. 
(d)  Execution issued in the name of the city for delinquent ad valorem taxes shall be directed and delivered to the chief of police, who shall enter the execution upon the docket to be kept in his office and he shall proceed to enforce the collection of the execution in the manner prescribed by law. 
(e)  The city clerk or the deputy city clerk will issue all fi. fas. for delinquent taxes and the chief of police shall execute such fi. fas. under the same procedures provided by law governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal process and remedies. 
State Law reference— Authority to municipality to impose excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Section 10.1.5 - Assessments. 
The county tax assessor shall be the tax assessor for the city. The city adopts the assessment made by the tax assessor of the county for all property located in the city for each year. 
Section 10.1.6 - Adjustments by County Tax Commissioner. 
Authority is granted to the tax commissioner of Fulton County to make such adjustments in the collection of individual items of tax, and to make such refunds as may be proper and necessary and to adjust all of same with the city by adding to or deducting from the distribution due to the city at the next period of accounting. 
Section 10.1.7 - Intangible Tax Refund. 
In any case where a refund has been authorized for any part of the state, county, and county schools' share of intangible tax, that such action shall be authority to the tax commissioner to refund the proportionate part of the city's share of the intangible tax and to charge it against his next distribution. 
Article 10.2 - Hotel Motel Tax[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-07-11 , § 1, adopted July 11, 2016, repealed the former art. 10.2, §§ 10.2.1—10.2.9, and enacted a new art. 10.2 as set out herein. The former art. 10.2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-06-06, Amended, 06/13/2005; Ord. No. 2001-11-02, Amended, 11/19/2001. 

Section 10.2.1. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
City means the City of Roswell and, variously, the incorporated territory of Roswell, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A 48-13-50, et seq. 
City administrator means the duly appointed city administrator of the city or her/his designee. 
Due date means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishing of services or to the services and accommodations which accompany the use or possession of a guest room in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who for a consideration uses or possesses or has the right to use or possess a guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the City of Roswell, including the owner, proprietor, lessee, sublessee, licensee, or other entity operating the premises. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than thirty (30) continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, organization, company, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or other group, combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for the occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.2. - Tax Rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of six (6) percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 10.2.4. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.3. - Collection of Tax by Lodging Provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of six (6) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 10.2.4. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this sub-section. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this sub-section shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.4. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been rendered uninhabitable by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.5. - Registration of Lodging Provider; Form and Contents; Execution; Certificate of Authority. 
Every person engaged in or about to engage in the operating as an operator of a hotel in the City of Roswell shall register with the city administrator on a form provided by the city administrator. Persons engaged in the business must so register not later than August 15, 1989, but the failure to register shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax. The registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places or business, and other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the city administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association of partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The city administrator shall, after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. The certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the city administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.6. - Filing Return; Payment; Collector Reimbursement. 
(a)  Due date of taxes . All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city administrator monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date . A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (1) month or less; and an additional five (5) percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements . If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority . O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud . In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents . On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city administrator. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city administrator. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three (3) consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest . The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers . Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.7. - Deficiency Determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation . If the city administrator is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax . Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 10.2.6. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of . The city administrator shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed . Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination . The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.8. - Determination if No Return Made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts . If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city administrator shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city administrator. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 10.2.7(c). 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.9. - Collection of Tax by City. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for . At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city administrator may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business . If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this ordinance sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money . If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this ordinance sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city administrator either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold . If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected . Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city administrator, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.10. - Disposition of Revenue. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all revenue collected by the city from the tax shall be deposited into the general fund of the city, and the proceeds of the tax may be expended for any purpose for which the city is authorized by law to spend public funds. 
(b)  Tourism, convention, promotion and facility. The City of Roswell shall expend all amounts collected under this article during each fiscal year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4), as may be amended from time to time. 
( 2018-11-16 , § 1, Amended, 11/26/2018; 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.11. - Administration and Enforcement. 
(a)  The city administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.: form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, such records, folios, receipts, certificates of exemption, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the city administrator may require. Said records shall at al times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city administrator or any person authorized in writing by the city administrator may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, and facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of and return made or to ascertain and determine the amount of tax which should be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city administrator shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this ordinance, the city administrator may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city administrator when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city administrator may prescribe. 
(e)  The city administrator shall have the power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws or ordinances for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the article and the collection of the tax. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Section 10.2.12. - Penalty for Violation. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 10.2.3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 10.2.6, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
( 2016-07-11 , § 1, Amended 07/11/2016) 
Article 10.3 - Occupation Taxes[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-07-12 , att. A, adopted Aug. 27, 2018, repealed art. 10.3 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. 10.3, §§ 10.3.1—10.3.17, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-11-20 , att. A, adopted Nov. 28, 2016. 

Section 10.3.1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following meaning: 
Administrative fee is the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
City means the City of Roswell. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including, without being limited to, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Location or office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a temporary worksite which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a fee levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporation or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) but do not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of the regulatory fee shall approximate the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs imposed as conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees for purposes of this article. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Section 10.3.2 - Administrative Fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration and all renewals thereafter. The administrative fee shall be set by mayor and council, from time to time by resolution. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.3 - Regulatory Fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b) must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee. The regulatory fee shall be set by mayor and council, from time to time by resolution. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or other person charged with enforcing this article upon request. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.4 - Occupation Tax Levied; Limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon gross receipts and number of employees is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the State of Georgia in accordance with a fee schedule set by the mayor and council, from time to time by resolution. 
(1)  The number of employees of a business or practitioner is computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, pursuant to O.C.G.A § 48-13-10. 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from the occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one (1) local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the gross receipts generated within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the other local government. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know the amount of gross receipts generated by the business or practitioner in the calendar year for which occupation tax is due, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the gross receipts. If such estimate is not accurate, any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city administrator. 
(f)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers transacting business within the boundaries of the city, which tax shall be based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the boundaries of the city. 
(g)  Attorneys subject to the occupation tax pursuant to this article shall be responsible for paying such fee by December 31 of each year for the previous year. The penalty for failure to pay such occupation tax shall be as defined in subsections 10.3.15(a), (b) and (e) of this article, provided that no criminal sanctions shall be imposed by the city. 
(h)  Multi-family rental housing. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows: 
Certified building inspector. A person inspecting for compliance with the various adopted codes who is a licensed design professional (architect or engineer) or holds one (1) of the following certifications from SBCCI (ICC): Property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
Code compliance certificate. A certificate, substantially similar to Exhibit "A" attached hereto and incorporated herein, executed by a certified building inspector and stating compliance with those minimum standards described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report. The report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease. Any written or oral agreement which sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multi-family rental dwellings or multi-family rental units. 
Multi-family rental dwelling. Any multi-family structure, multi-family building, or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to multiple family dwellings, multiple family apartment units, boarding houses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multi-family rental unit. Any one (1) area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multi-family rental dwelling that is being leased or rented to only one (1) tenant, group of tenants, or family under one (1) lease, or under terms of joint and severable liability. 
Occupancy. Includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit. 
Owner. Any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
Owner-occupied. Any part of a structure used as living quarters by the owner of said structure where other parts of the structure are used as multi-family rental units. Example: Two-family dwelling, owner occupies one (1) flat; rooming house, owner occupies one (1) unit. 
Premises. Any lot or piece of land inclusive of the multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit. 
(2)  Fee and certificate required. All owners of multi-family rental dwellings or multi-family rental unit(s) within the city that receive income for use of four (4) or more such dwellings or units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the city (a) shall be subject to an occupation tax as provided in this article and (b) shall provide to the city, prior to September 1, 2004, a code compliance certificate covering one hundred (100) percent of the multi-family rental units within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date of the certification. Said code compliance certificate shall certify that all units inspected are in compliance with those standards contained in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. For the initial year of construction, this section shall not apply to new construction or rehabilitation of a multi-family rental dwelling provided proper permits are obtained from the city. 
Upon initial inspection of such dwellings or units, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth herein, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the chief building official outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If such plan is accepted by the chief building official as reasonable and justified, an extension may be granted for up to one (1) year for completion of repairs and compliance with this ordinance. No extension shall be granted if life safety issues are involved and any such units shall not be leased until brought into compliance. 
After submission of the initial code compliance certificate, each owner shall submit a code compliance certificate annually, commencing on January 1, 2006 with their business license renewal. Such subsequent code compliance certificate shall cover at least twenty (20) percent of the units, provided all units shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five (5) years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted to the city by the certified building inspector. 
Furthermore, each owner and certified building inspector shall keep a written record of all inspections for each unit including the date of the inspection, items inspected and all violations, if any, observed. Such records shall be available to the city upon request. Such records shall be presented to the city within ten (10) business days after such request is made in writing to the inspector. Failure to provide such records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for those units. 
(3)  Failure to provide code compliance certificate. Failure to provide the code compliance certificate as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance and is subject to those penalties contained herein and in section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances. Further, said failure, upon a judicial determination, shall be a condition constituting probable cause, and may subject said multi-family rental dwelling or multi-family rental unit(s) to inspection by the city building official at a fee as determined by the city council that covers all costs of such inspection by the city. Said inspection by the city, if required, shall be at the sole cost of the owner and failure to pay said cost shall result in a lien being placed on the premises as provided for collection of taxes. Failure to pay the occupational tax as provided herein shall be a violation of this ordinance and is subject to those penalties set forth in this article. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from enforcement of the state minimum standard codes as provided in chapter 5 of this Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
EXHIBIT "A"  CODE COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE 
Building Department  City of Roswell  Roswell City Hall  38 Hill Street  Roswell, Georgia 30075 
Re: [Name and address of Apartment Community] 
_______ Total Number of Units 
_____/_____/_____ Units Inspected (Listed individually) 
Gentlemen: 
 The undersigned is a Certified Building Inspector pursuant to City of Roswell Ordinance Section 10.3.4(h) and provides this certification pursuant to such Ordinance. 
 Those apartment units listed on the inspection reports attached hereto have been inspected and found to be in compliance with applicable building codes of the City of Roswell currently in effect. For purposes of this certification, compliance with applicable building codes shall be deemed to mean that those units inspected meet those certain minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for dwellings as set forth on the inspection reports attached hereto. In the event that the undersigned is an employee of the owner or property manager of the community, the undersigned is acting only in such capacity and shall incur no personal liability in connection with such inspections. Nothing herein imposes any liability on the City of Roswell or prevents the City of Roswell from enforcing Georgia Minimum Standard Codes as provided by Georgia law and the Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
Certified and sworn  this _____ day of _______, 200___  [Signature of Inspector]        Name: _____ Registration Number: _____ Certification Held: _____ 
INSPECTION REPORT 
Name of Community: _____ Apartment No.: _____ Date of Inspection: _____ 

 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.5 - Occupation Tax Certificate. 
Every business, practitioner, and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer or other person charged with enforcing this article upon request. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.6 - Practitioners of Professions and Occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this article shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 10.3.4 above or shall pay an occupation tax as set by mayor and council, from time to time by resolution. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.7 - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3. 
(4)  Any farm operating for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.8 - Evidence of State Registration When Required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. Title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.9 - Evidence of Qualification Required if Applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates or qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.10 - Filing Returns; Other Information Required or Requested. 
(a)  On or before March 15 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax article shall file with the city administrator or his designee, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the gross receipts and number of employees of such business or practitioner during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city administrator or make available to the city within thirty (30) days or such longer time period as the city deems appropriate such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax or regulatory fee(s). Such information may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name under which business is to be conducted. 
(2)  Local business address. 
(3)  Mailing address of business, if other than local address. 
(4)  Description of business activity to be conducted. 
(5)  Applicant's name, social security number and association with business. (Applicant shall be local manager, business owner, or corporate officer.) 
(6)  If a partnership or proprietorship, social security number of each individual. If a corporation, tax identification number and list of officers' names and titles. 
(7)  Name, address and telephone number of owner of the property where the business is located. 
(8)  Evidence of state or county certification, as applicable. 
(9)  Statement that the applicant (including all partners or the officers and local manager, if a corporation) has never been convicted of a felony. 
(10)  Agreement by applicant that the city may investigate his/her background and use such in deciding on the granting of authority to conduct business in the city. 
(11)  Statement that the applicant has never been denied the authority to conduct the business herein described, except as noted. 
(12)  Statement affirming validity of the information provided. 
(13)  Quarterly wage statements and W-3 transmittal forms furnished to other governmental entities, including the state and federal governments. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.11 - Inspections of Books and Records; Audits; Confidential Information. 
(a)  The city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books or records of any business for which returns have been based upon the gross receipts. Upon demand of the city administrator or appointee, such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative or agent of the city within thirty (30) days. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classified as agents for the purposes of this article. Failure of submission of such books and records within thirty (30) days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax registration currently existing in the city. If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law and penalties provided for by this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no attorney shall be required to disclose any information that would violate the attorney/client privilege. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(c)  Information provided to the city by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.12 - Business Classifications for Determining Tax Levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined by the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS), and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, United States Treasury Department, or Internal Revenue Service. The finance department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability to be established by the city council are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one (1) business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts returned to the city to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. The gross receipts tax shall exempt an amount set by the mayor and council, from time to time by resolution. Gross revenues above the exemption amount are taxed using a fee class table based on profitability. 
(d)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.13 - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax shall be treated as confidential to the extent it qualifies for exemption from disclosure under O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 18, Article 4. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.14 - Date Due; Penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on March 15 or at such other time as may be designated by the city. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for thirty (30) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.15 - Enforcement; Violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city administrator or his designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this article to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city administrator may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city administrator shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one (1) percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city administrator of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  Individuals, businesses and practitioner who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to the penalties provided herein and in section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to the penalties provided herein and in section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances and, in addition thereto, shall be subject to suspension, revocation, or failure to renew such taxpayer's right to conduct business. 
(e)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who are delinquent in payment of any tax, fee, charge, utility bill or other debt owed to the city shall not be issued an occupation tax certificate until such tax, fee, charge, utility bill or other debt has been paid. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person [or] business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for, or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.16 - Public Hearing. 
After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 10.3.4. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Section 10.3.17 - Prior Ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one (1), such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
( 2018-07-12 , att. A, Amended 08/27/2018) 
Article 10.4 - Precious Metals and Gem Dealers[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5 authorizes local governments to license and regulate dealers in precious metals or gems. 

Section 10.4.1 - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the safety, health and welfare of its citizens, to regulate the licensing of and the purchase and sale of precious metals and gems. 
Section 10.4.2 - Application. 
This article shall be applicable to the principals of any entity performing any activity regulated by this chapter and to their agents and employees and to persons forming a partnership or corporation for the purpose of engaging in any activity subject to regulation by this article. No person shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by reason of association temporarily with any dealer or permit holder or by reason of conducting temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of the business in the name of any dealer or permit holder. Every dealer who sells and/or purchases and sells precious metals and gems after the effective date of this article shall be liable for all the penalties provided for violation of any provision of this article, whether such violation be committed by himself or his agent, clerk or employee. Further, any entity, person, corporation, association or partnership presently dealing in precious metals and gems within the city limits must comply with the terms of this article without regard as to whether or not such entity has a license to transact other business in Roswell on the effective date of this article. 
Section 10.4.3 - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Applicant shall mean any one (1) or more persons, firms, corporations, or associations, or any combination thereof, applying for a license, or renewal thereof. 
Application shall include all applications authorized or required under this article, and they shall all be in writing, signed, dated and sworn to by the applicant and by all partners if the applicant is a partnership, and by the principal officer or stockholder if the applicant is a corporation. 
Chief of police shall mean the chief of police of Roswell or his/her designated representative. 
City administrator shall mean the city administrator of Roswell or his/her designated representative. 
City clerk shall mean the city clerk of Roswell and/or the city administrator. 
Dealer shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation, and any principal, employee, agent, or servant thereof, regularly engaged in or conducting the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from such are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturer's representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Established dealer shall mean any dealer who has a license to operate in the city at a fixed location. 
Gems shall mean any precious or semiprecious stone cut and polished. 
Governing authority shall mean the mayor and city council of Roswell. 
Itinerant dealer shall mean any dealer as defined herein who engaged in any temporary or transient business conducted in a shop, room, hotel room, motel room or other premises rented for any duration less than thirty (30) consecutive days or used on a temporary basis. 
License shall mean the written authority for a person to purchase and sell precious metals and gems in the city. 
Licensed dealer shall mean one who has been authorized to buy and sell precious metals in Roswell and if such dealer is located out of Roswell, by another state and/or municipality. 
Numismatic coins shall mean coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Persons shall mean individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, trusts, associations, or any other legal entities however organized. 
Possession shall include having any precious metals and/or gems on the person or under control of the person whether in a motor vehicle, public place, store, house or building of any type. 
Precious metals shall mean gold, silver or platinum, or any alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Renewal, when used in connection with an application for a license, shall relate to an unrevoked license of purchase and sale of precious metals and gems to a designated licensee for a designated location, on expiration of which unrevoked license the identical owners thereof, but no other, may be entitled to a new annual license upon filing of the necessary renewal application, clearance of the chief of police, payment of a twenty-five-dollar investigation fee, payment of the license fee and approval of the city administrator. 
Satisfactory proof shall mean adequate or sufficient evidence to convince an unbiased, impartial, enlightened judge of the existence or nonexistence of a fact, situation or condition. 
(2010-10-15, § 1, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1. 
Section 10.4.4 - Registration Required. 
No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems until he has registered with the chief of police or his designee for each separate place of business. A current business license is required in order to register and before one can engage in business as a dealer in precious metals and gems. Registration shall be renewed annually upon payment of the required fee. 
Section 10.4.5 - Application for Permit. 
Applicants for a permit under this chapter, whether a person, firm, or corporation, shall file a written, sworn application on a form provided by the city, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership and by the president if a corporation, with the city clerk, (two (2) complete copies will be filed). One (1) will be sent to the chief of police for investigation of the licensee or licensees. The application will include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Names and addresses. The name or names of the principals, agents, and employees of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (as proprietor, agent, employee or otherwise); the name and the address of the person, firm, or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state it is incorporated and the name and address of the registered agent of the corporation. 
(b)  Fingerprints. The fingerprints of the principals, agents or employees of the applicant's business, and other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the chief of police the good character of such persons carry on the business of a dealer. 
(c)  Proposed place of business. The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted. 
(d)  Previous place of business. The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of said application conducted an itinerant business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(e)  Statement concerning nature of advertising. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers. 
(f)  Prior convictions. Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefore. 
(g)  Credentials authorizing applicant as a representative. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative, 
(h)  Additional information requested by chief of police. Such other information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the chief of police may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(i)  Payment by check. Dealers shall pay for items covered under this article by check rather than cash in order to provide a more complete record of transactions. 
(2010-10-15, § 2, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.6 - Qualifications. 
(a)  The licensee must be a person of good moral character. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems if any employee or stockholder has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state of the United States. This provision shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten (10) years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems if any employee or stockholder has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude ten (10) years preceding the date of the application. 
(d)  The licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, for cause, such as a violation of regulations, or improper operations, within five (5) years next preceding his application, any license issued to him by the City of Roswell and/or any other city, county, and/or state, to sell precious metals and gems. 
(e)  The licensee shall be the owner of the premises for which the license is held or the holder of a lease thereon. 
(f)  The licensee shall be active in, and solely responsible for, the operation of the business. 
(g)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his qualifications according to the foregoing and shall file the same with the clerk of the city before any license is issued. 
Section 10.4.7 - Investigation. 
(a)  Each applicant for an original license and/or renewal authorizes the city or its designated representatives to secure from any state, county, municipal or federal court, any police department and/or law enforcement agency his, her, or its criminal history and civil history, and further authorizes the city, its officers and employees, to use such information in determining whether or not a license shall be issued to applicant. Further, the applicant authorizes the city, its officers and employees to use such information in a hearing to determine whether or not the applicant's license should be voided, cancelled and/or revoked. Each applicant waives any right or rights, he, she or it may have under state or federal law, statute and/or court ruling to preclude the city from securing such criminal and/or civil history from any source. 
(b)  Every dealer shall admit to his premises at any time any police officer to examine his books or other records on the premises or in his possession, as well as articles purchased or received; and to search for and take into possession any article known by that officer to be missing or known or believed by him to be stolen, without the formality of a search warrant or any other process. 
Section 10.4.8 - Issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license in accordance with the provisions of section 10.4.5 and a check for $25.00 to cover the investigation fee, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business responsibility or moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. The chief of police shall make a report of his investigation to the city administrator. The chief of police may, after investigation and finding that the health, safety, or welfare of the public so demands, recommend that a license not be issued to an applicant for reasons including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Conviction of any felony under the laws of this state or any other state of the United States, provided, however, this shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten (10) years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence; 
(b)  Conviction of any crime within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application; 
(d)  That the applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; or 
(e)  An applicant for a license may, in the discretion of the city administrator be issued a temporary permit based upon a preliminary investigation by the chief of police, which permit shall remain in effect until the issuance or denial of a license as herein provided. A confidential record of the investigation shall be kept on file by the chief of police. 
The license issued hereunder shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be any abatement of the license fee for such license by reason of the fact that the license holder shall have exercised the privilege for any period of less than it was granted. The license fee for an established dealer is $300.00. 
The issuance of a license to any itinerant dealer shall specify the place and date or dates upon which the business may be conducted. A license fee of $10.00 per day shall be charged, and the license shall be issued only for the period specified in the application. 
The license issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business named therein. Each person receiving such license shall place over the principal entrance of his place of business a sign designating that he is a licensed dealer. 
(2010-10-15, § 3, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.9 - Permanent Records Required; Content. 
(a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a book, in permanent form (the book and pages therein shall be numbered, no pages will be skipped), in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems the information specified in O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. In addition with respect to each seller the dealer shall either: 
(1)  Personally vouch for the seller's true and correct identity through personal, long-standing acquaintance of friendship, or reputable standing in the community; or 
(2)  Employ an identification system approved by the chief of police of Roswell which records a photograph or fingerprint of the seller. The dealer shall maintain and record said photograph or negative thereof or fingerprint in a permanent file for a period of two (2) years. The permanent record book shall include tracking information consistent with subsection (1) or (2) above. 
(b)  The permanent record book required herein shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two (2) years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number. 
Section 10.4.10 - Report of Transactions by Dealers. 
(a)  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall make a report in writing to the chief of police of Roswell of all precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased on the day previous to the date of the report on forms approved or prescribed by the chief of police of the city. The report shall contain the information specified in O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3(a)(1)—(5), the book and page number of the record book where the original entry was made and shall be typewritten or handwritten in legible English and mailed or delivered to the chief of police of the city within twenty-four (24) hours after the day on which the transactions occurred. There will be no changes made from the original record. 
(b)  All reports shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the chief of police of Roswell and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designated representative may, in his discretion, authorize any person to inspect the reports in an effort to locate stolen property who demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document. 
Section 10.4.11 - Zoning and Change of Location. 
(a)  All applications shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the Unified Development Code (UDC) and planning classification of the premises. 
(b)  Each dealer shall be required to notify the chief of police and the city clerk of the municipality in which the dealer is registered within seven (7) calendar days of any change of address of the dealer or business. The chief of police of the city will send a copy of any change of address of the dealer and/or business to the Sheriff of Fulton County within seven (7) days of the notification. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014) 
Section 10.4.12 - Posting of License. 
Each dealer will post in a prominent place in his business a copy of the license from the city. Such license will be returned to the chief of police if the dealer goes out of business for any reason. 
Section 10.4.13 - Requirements and Unlawful Activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals or gems who makes purchases of precious metals or gems or of goods made from precious metals or gems to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in the application for a license as provided for in this article; 
(2)  Fails to maintain and make entries in the permanent record book as required by section 10.4.9 of this chapter; 
(3)  Make any false entry therein or skip any pages in the record book; 
(4)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(5)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record book or any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(6)  Sell, exchange, or remove from the legal possession of the buyer or to alter the form of any precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least fifteen (15) calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; 
(7)  Fail to make the written reports as required in this article or make a false report; or 
(8)  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering pursuant to the provisions of this article. Provided, however, those dealers in the business at this time must make application for a license within ten (10) days after the effective date of this article, but may continue to transact business under the terms of this article unless the chief of police recommends that their license be revoked and the city administrator refuse to allow such licensee to continue in this business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a licensed dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(d)  If the chief of police of Roswell has probable cause to believe that the precious metals or gems have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain the precious metals or gems for an additional fifteen (15) days and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the fifteen-day period. 
(e)  No dealer shall have in his place of business or in his possession, or shall have acquired and resold, bartered or exchanged, any article which is proved to have been stolen, the account and report of which he has not kept and reported as herein prescribed. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to acquire, by purchase, barter, exchange or otherwise, goods bearing evidence of a serial number or initials which has been tampered with or scratched or obliterated in any manner unless such person immediately contacts the police department of the city. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to accept, buy or exchange any articles prior to examining the identifying credentials of the person selling or exchanging said articles. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer to transact business off the premises on which the business is located. 
(2010-10-15, § 4, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.14 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. Further operation of any business hereunder in violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense for each day of operation. Further, any person concealing a violation or harboring, assisting or protecting a person charged with and/or convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
Section 10.4.15 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this act shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. Provided, however, all such transactions must be made without any alteration being made in any of the coins and the coins must be sold on the basis of the coins and not to persons whose sole business is to melt down the coins for their precious metal value. 
Section 10.4.16 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10-15, § 5, adopted Oct. 11, 2010, repealed § 10.4.16 which pertained to public hearing. 
Section 10.4.17 - License Period. 
No license shall be issued for less than a calendar year and in case of revocation or surrender of a license issued hereunder before the expiration of the period for which it is issued, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
Section 10.4.18 - Renewal and Expiration of License. 
Applicants in any given year for renewal of their license hereunder for the next year shall file their applications during the month of October before their licenses for the current year expire on the last day of December. All licenses issued for a particular year, or portion of such year, shall expire on the last day of such year except when extended as herein provided. 
Section 10.4.19 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10-15, § 6, adopted Oct. 11, 2010, repealed § 10.4.19 which pertained to public hearings not required for renewal. 
Section 10.4.20 - Approval by City Administrator Required for Renewal; Filing Objections. 
(a)  A city license or renewal thereof shall not be issued hereunder until the application therefore is approved or granted by the city administrator. All licenses expire on December 31 of each calendar year; provided, however, when timely objections to an application for a renewal license are filed, the life of the current unexpired license is hereby extended to and through the date on which the city administrator grants or denies such renewal application, or until the first Tuesday next after the first Monday in the next February, whichever date is first, if the annual license fee for such renewal shall have been deposited with the city treasurer for such renewal period within five (5) days after being notified that objections have been filed to his application for renewal of his license. 
(b)  The applicant for renewal of license shall be notified of any objections to his application for such renewal within forty-eight (48) hours by service of a police officer or by registered or certified mail addressed to the licensee at the address of the store operated under his license in Roswell, which notice shall be dated and signed by the city administrator and shall include a copy of the objections filed. 
(2010-10-15, § 7, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.21 - Issuance of License after Approval and Fee Payment. 
When an application for a license, or renewal thereof, has been approved by the city administrator, and the applicant has deposited with the city clerk the annual license fee, the clerk shall issue such license. 
(2010-10-15, § 8, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.22 - Transfer of License Authorized in Some Circumstances. 
A license shall not be transferable, except as provided in this section. In case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor or lawful adult heir or heirs of such deceased person unless the governing authority of the city finds and determines that it would otherwise violate the law or this article. If such legal representative of such deceased licensee cannot meet all the requirements of this article, when the time arrives to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
Section 10.4.23 - License a Privilege Only. 
Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges, and the city administrator of Roswell, Georgia, shall have the discretion to approve or deny any application for a license to sell precious metals and gems or to revoke the same under the provisions of section 10.4.25. 
(2010-10-15, § 9, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Section 10.4.24 - Appeal Procedure. 
(a)  In the event of a rejection of the license by the City Administrator of Roswell or his/her designated representative, the police department or any other person (other than mayor and city council), the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended license or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) or more than thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(b)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council shall set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(c)  Whenever the city clerk has scheduled, an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the mayor and city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, over-rule or modify the action dealing with rejection of the license. The action of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(2010-10-15, § 10, Added, 10/11/2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-10-15, §§ 10—12, renumbered the former §§ 10.4.24 and 10.4.25 as §§ 10.4.25 and 10.4.26 and enacted a new § 10.4.24 as set out herein. 
Section 10.4.25 - License Fees; Conduct of Business Prohibited after Expiration of License; Fees Nonrefundable. 
(a)  All licenses and renewals thereof must be obtained and all fees paid by the applicants therefore by certified check or cash within fourteen (14) days from the date of approval of the license application by the, city administrator or no later than the last business day of the calendar year that the city hall is open for business. The effect of a failure or refusal to pay such annual license fee within such time shall be to nullify such approval which then expires, and the license or renewal shall be void. No business shall be conducted after revocation or expiration of a license, or renewal thereof, unless a further renewal has been issued and paid for or the life of the expiring license has been extended as herein authorized. 
(b)  If after approval by the city administrator of an original application for a license, or the renewal thereof and the payment by the licensee of the annual fee, the licensee fails to exercise the privilege conferred by the license within nine (9) months from the date of approval of such original application or renewal by the city administrator, the license shall be automatically forfeited for the unused term of the license, without refund of any fee paid. 
(2010-10-15, § 11, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10.4.24. 
Section 10.4.26 - Cancellation of License for Cause after Hearing. 
No license which may hereafter be issued hereunder shall be suspended, revoked, or cancelled except for cause as herein defined, after a public hearing upon at least ten (10) days' prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, with a statement of the reason for such hearing. 
"Due cause" for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a license hereunder shall consist of any violation of this article, or any part of it, or any laws or ordinances of this city or state prohibiting or regulating the business of purchasing, selling or dealing in precious metals and gems, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law involving moral turpitude, or violation of city ordinances other than traffic ordinances. It shall also consist of willfully making false statements, being involved in any scheme for himself and/or herself or that of another applicant which misleads the city in granting a license or renewal, or willful concealment of material matters of fact in obtaining or preventing another from obtaining a license hereunder. 
Notice to a licensee to show cause why his license should not be revoked shall consist of a certified copy of a letter from the city administrator charging the licensee, or information and belief, with the violation of a law or ordinance provision, or violation of a provision of this article or state law, which alleged violation, if true, warrants revocation, and notifying such licensee of the time and place of a public hearing, which certified copy shall be served on the licensee in person or by delivery of it to the licensee by delivering it to the licensee's authorized agent in this city or if neither of the foregoing methods of service can be effected, then by tacking it to the front of the precious metals and gems outlet in said city. Service may be perfected by a city police officer of this city or some other person authorized to serve such papers. 
(2010-10-15, § 12, Amended, 10/11/2010) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 10.4.24. 
Article 10.5 - Pawnbrokers 

Section 10.5.1 - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, a pawnbroker is any person whose business is to lend money, usually in small sums, on security of personal property deposited with him or left in pawn, or whoever loans money on deposit of pledges of personal property or who purchases personal property or chooses in action on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
Section 10.5.2 - Business Hours. 
No pawnbroker shall open his place of business or conduct any business therein between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; provided however, that such a place of business may remain open until 9:00 p.m. on Fridays and until 9:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
Section 10.5.3 - Sunday Operation Prohibited. 
No pawnbroker shall open his place of business or conduct any business therein on Sunday. 
Section 10.5.4 - Pledges to be Openly Displayed. 
Every pawnbroker shall have his pledges openly displayed so that the inspection authorized by this article may be easily made. 
Section 10.5.5 - Premises to be Open to Police. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to admit to his premises the chief of police or any other police officer who may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this article, without the formality of a search warrant. 
Section 10.5.6 - Inspection of Pledges and Purchases. 
All articles pledged or sold to pawnbrokers shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by the police. 
Section 10.5.7 - Maintenance of Records. 
All pawnbrokers shall keep records as required by O.C.G.A. §§ 44-12-132—44-12-134. The entries required shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible and, in no event, more than one (1) hour thereafter. All pawnbrokers shall furnish to the chief of police or his designated representative a weekly report of all property pledged or sold to them with an accurate description of the property to include, but not be limited to, the maker of the articles, the serial number and any other identifying mark. These reports shall be made on each Wednesday for the preceding week, unless sooner requested by the chief of police. 
Section 10.5.8 - Same—Inspection. 
The records required to be kept by section 10.5.7 and state law shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by the police. 
Section 10.5.9 - Transactions with Minors Prohibited. 
No pawnbroker shall receive any article in pawn or purchase any article for resale from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Section 10.5.10 - Duration of Pawn Transactions. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-12-131 shall govern the duration of all pawn transactions. In addition there shall be a grace period on pawn transactions as required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-403. 
Section 10.5.11 - License. 
A pawnbroker's license must be taken out in the name of an individual, even though such business is operated as a partnership or a corporation. The license fee for a pawnbroker is $300.00. 
Article 10.6 - Financial Institutions 

Section 10.6.1 - Banks—License Tax Levied. 
There is hereby levied a license tax upon depository financial institutions located within the city limits at a rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions as defined and allocated in this chapter provided that the minimum annual amount of such levy upon any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00. As used herein, "depository financial institution" means a "bank" chartered under the laws of this state or under the laws of the United States and domiciled in this state which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a corporate structure authorizing the issuance of capital stock, and a "savings and loan association" meaning any financial institution other than a credit union, chartered under the laws of this state or under the laws of the United States and domiciled in this state which is authorized to receive deposits in this state and which has a mutual corporate form. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 provides that local governments may collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions. 
Section 10.6.2 - Calculating Gross Receipts. 
In calculating the business license tax levied on banks, "gross receipts" has the same meaning as, and is determined in accordance with, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
Section 10.6.3 - Allocation of Total Gross Receipts. 
The total gross receipts generated in this state by a depository financial institution subject to the tax provided for herein shall be allocated among separate taxing jurisdictions as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). 
Section 10.6.4 - Filing Information and Returns; When Payment. 
(a)  All banks and financial institutions doing business in the city shall file with the city clerk all the information called for by this article and necessary to arrive at the gross receipts as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 not later than March 1 of each year. In addition, the tax payable under this article shall be due and payable no later than March 1 of each year. 
(b)  In the event that as of March 1 of any year hereafter, no current ad valorem tax digest is available or no current ad valorem tax rate has been set by the mayor and city council, all savings and loan institutions doing business within the city shall be required to file their return and pay the tax called for herein within fifteen (15) days of the date a current ad valorem tax computation is available. 
Section 10.6.5 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(b)  For a violation of this article the guilty person or company shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3, and in addition to such punishment, such violation shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license. 
Article 10.7 - Insurance Companies 

Section 10.7.1 - Insurers License Fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Roswell, Georgia in the amount of $150.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 10.7.2, which is operated and maintained by such company within the City of Roswell, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $150.00. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(2001-12-01, Amended, 12/03/2001) 
Section 10.7.2 - License Fees for Insurers Insuring Certain Risks at Additional Business Locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $52.50 per location for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter. 
(2001-12-01, Amended, 12/03/2001) 
Section 10.7.3 - Gross Premiums Tax Imposed on Life Insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10.7.1 of this ordinance. 
(2001-12-01, Amended, 12/03/2001) 
Section 10.7.4 - Gross Premiums Tax, All Other Insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half (2½) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 10.7.1. 
(2001-12-01, Amended, 12/03/2001) 
Section 10.7.5 - Due Date for License Fees; Delinquency. 
License fees imposed in sections 10.7.1 and 10.7.2 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. Any license fee not paid by February 15 of the year for which it is due shall be delinquent. 
Section 10.7.6 - Reports Required. 
(a)  Every insurance company subject to the license fees set forth in section 10.7.1 of this article shall file with the finance department on forms prescribed by the department a statement showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of every business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; and such other reasonable information as may be required and, in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premiums received, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. Such statements shall be verified by affidavit of an officer of such company and it shall be an offense for any person, firm, corporation or agent thereof to knowingly or willfully make or furnish a false or incomplete statement or report hereunder. Said statement shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee. 
(b)  The person responsible for each insurance business location subject to license fees under section 10.7.2 shall file with the finance department a statement, on forms prescribed by the department, showing the address of the business location, the name of the persons writing insurance at such location, and the names of the companies represented at such location, and such other reasonable information as may be required. Such statement shall be verified by affidavit of the person in charge of such business location, and it shall be an offense under this Code for any person, firm, corporation or agent thereof to knowingly or willfully make or furnish a false or incomplete statement of the facts required by this article. Said statements shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee. 
(c)  All reports and statements required to be filed under this article shall be confidential, but the information contained therein shall be for the use of the officers of the city. 
(2001-12-01, Amended, 12/03/2001) 
Section 10.7.7 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. 
(b)  For a violation of this article the guilty person or company shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3, and in addition to such punishment, such violation shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license. 
Article 10.8 - Bail Bondsmen 

Section 10.8.1 - Bond Forfeiture—Required for Failure to Appear. 
It shall be the duty of the recorder of the city to forfeit the appearance bonds of all persons who fail to answer when their cases are called for trial in the recorder's court. 
(Ord. of 3-3-58) 
Section 10.8.2 - Same—Notice to Bondsman; Bondsman's Obligation. 
After appearance bonds are forfeited the bondsman who signed said bond shall be notified by the city clerk of said forfeiture, and unless said bondsman produces the defendant in open court within two (2) weeks of said forfeiture, or unless said bondsman shall pay into court the amount of said bond within two (2) weeks from said forfeiture, proceedings will be instituted against said bondsman to collect said bond as provided in the Charter. 
(Ord. of 3-3-58) 
State Law reference— Forfeiture of bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
Section 10.8.3 - Same—Defaulting Bondsman. 
No person or bonding company shall be allowed to sign the bond of any person who has violated or has been charged with violating an ordinance of the city after said person or bonding company has failed to either produce the person whose bond has been forfeited or has failed to pay the amount of said bond into court as required in section 12-3. 
(Ord. of 3-3-58) 
Article 10.9 - Door to Door Solicitation 

Section 10.9.1 - Permit Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of soliciting, calling on residences door-to-door without first having obtained a permit in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
Section 10.9.2 - Applicability. 
This chapter is meant to apply to door-to-door solicitations for commercial transactions for profit only. It is not meant to regulate solicitation for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
State Law reference— Local limitation on imposition of regulatory fees, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
Section 10.9.3 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be considered to have the meaning herein ascribed thereto: 
Licensed solicitor shall mean and include any person who has obtained a valid permit as hereinafter provided, which permit is in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting. 
Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure. 
Soliciting shall mean and include any one (1) or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
Section 10.9.4 - Permit—Application Required; Presentation. 
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting as herein defined from persons in residences within the City of Roswell, is hereby required to make written application for a permit as hereinafter provided. Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the City of Roswell carry upon his or her person the permit so issued and the same shall be exhibited by such solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited. 
Section 10.9.5 - Same—Information Contained. 
Each permit issued shall contain the name of the solicitor, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the solicitor is employed by or represents, a photograph of the solicitor, and physical description. Such photograph shall be provided by the solicitor and shall be at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size. 
Section 10.9.6 - Same—Application. 
Application for a permit shall be made upon a form provided by the City of Roswell. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit: 
(a)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(b)  Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than present address; 
(c)  Age of applicant; 
(d)  Physical description of the applicant; 
(e)  Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(f)  Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years if other than the present employer; 
(g)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(h)  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
(i)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow; 
(j)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for permit under this chapter, if any; 
(k)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(l)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(m)  Names of the three (3) most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
(n)  Proposed method of operation; 
(o)  Description and license plate number of vehicle(s) intended to be operated by applicant; 
(p)  Signature of applicant; and 
(q)  Social security number of applicant. 
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the City of Roswell in connection with the application for the permit. 
The city administrator shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all permits issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of applications. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every permit issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. 
No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. 
Section 10.9.7 - Same—Revocation. 
Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city administrator if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned in to the city administrator's office. 
The permit shall state the expiration date thereof. In no event shall a permit be valid for more than six (6) months. Such permit is renewable. 
Section 10.9.8 - Fraud. 
Any licensed solicitor who shall be guilty of any fraud, cheating, or misrepresentation, whether through himself or through an employee, while acting as a solicitor in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
Section 10.9.9 - Fee. 
The fee for a permit shall be $25.00 for a six-month period for each solicitor. 
Section 10.9.10 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official business. 
Section 10.9.11 - Routes. 
To the extent practical, each solicitor shall identify the streets and routes which he will follow on each day he is engaged in the business of soliciting. If changes in routes are made, then such changes must be immediately reported to the city administrator's office. 
Section 10.9.12 - Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined if the occupant of said residence has made it clear, by written sign or otherwise, that solicitors are not invited. 
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
Section 10.9.13 - Time Limit on Soliciting. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether licensed under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, or before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Saving Time, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday, or on a state or national holiday. 
Section 10.9.14 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
Article 10.10 - Health Spas 

Section 10.10.1 - Definition. 
The term "health spa" means an establishment which provides as one (1) of its primary purposes, services or facilities which are purported to assist patrons improve their physical condition or appearance through change in weight, weight control, treatment, dieting, or exercise. The term includes an establishment designated as a "reducing salon," "health spa," "exercise gym," "health studio," "health club," or any by other terms of similar import. 
A health spa shall not include: 
(a)  Any nonprofit organization; 
(b)  Any facility wholly owned and operated by a licensed physician at which such physician is engaged in the practice of medicine; or 
(c)  Any such establishment operated by a health care facility, hospital, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing care facility. 
Section 10.10.2 - Requirements for Issuance of License. 
No license for a health spa will be issued until the applicant has met the following conditions: 
(a)  Applicant must furnish to the City of Roswell certificates from the State Court of Fulton County, Superior Court of Fulton County and the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, stating that applicant has not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the previous ten (10) years. If applicant has not resided in Fulton County during the ten-year period, he must furnish certificates from the proper jurisdictions of his residence. 
(b)  Applicant must furnish to the City of Roswell letters from three (3) residents of Fulton County stating their familiarity with applicant and his fitness for the license. 
(c)  Applicant must furnish evidence of public liability insurance covering the health spa. Such insurance shall not be less than $25,000.00. 
Section 10.10.3 - Disclosure Statement. 
Health spas licensed by the City of Roswell shall fully comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393.2. 
Section 10.10.4 - Cleanliness, Neatness, etc., of Premises. 
The premises shall be kept clean, neat and sanitary and shall comply with all sanitary and health requirements of the State of Georgia and Fulton County. 
Section 10.10.5 - Reserved. 
Section 10.10.6 - Agreement by Licensee; Fingerprints of Employees; Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. 
(a)  Licensee agrees that it will not employ persons of ill repute to work in the business, nor will it allow such place of business to become a brothel. 
(b)  The licensee and all employees will be fingerprinted by the chief of police of the City of Roswell or his designated representative. The chief of police shall issue a letter of clearance indicating such person is eligible for employment. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages will be sold or provided to customers on the premises. 
Section 10.10.7 - License Fee. 
The business license fee for a health spa shall be $150.00. 
Section 10.10.8 - Violation of Article; Voiding of License; Appeal. 
If any of the above conditions are violated, or conditions required by state law are not met, the license issued hereunder shall be void and the licensee will cease operation of the business. Provided, however, the licensee may appeal such decision to the city council within five (5) days of the notice that the license is voided. The decision of the city council is final. Licensee may continue to operate the business during the appeal. 
Article 10.11 - Adult Bookstores and Video Stores 

Section 10.11.1 - Purposes and Findings. 
Based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties, including, but not limited to Houston, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; Chattanooga, Tennessee; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Dayton, Ohio; Gwinnett County, Georgia; and Fulton County, Georgia which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by Roswell, Georgia, and based on documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by law enforcement personnel during the Gwinnett County Board of Commissioners' public hearing and regular meeting on August 7, 2001, the mayor and council of the City of Roswell take note of the opportunity for unlawful sexual activities including, but not limited to, masturbation and oral and anal sex to occur at adult bookstores and video stores which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or other reproductions depicting nudity, and for sexually transmitted diseases to spread as a result of the unhealthy conditions and unlawful activities associated with such booths, and the mayor and council further note that persons frequent such video viewing booths for the purpose of engaging in sexual activities within such video viewing booths, and bodily fluids, including semen, urine and feces are found in such video viewing booths. 
The mayor and council find that removal of doors on such video viewing booths and prohibiting holes between such booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in such booths. The mayor and council therefore find that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the community to require that doors or other partitions on video viewing booths in adult bookstores and video stores be removed and that no holes be allowed to exist between adjoining booths. The mayor and council find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing unlawful sexual activities and unhealthy conditions in video viewing booths found in adult bookstores and video stores. The mayor and council further find that these regulations will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this ordinance is hereby adopted. 
(2001-09-05, Added, 09/05/2001) 
Section 10.11.2 - Regulations. 
Any adult bookstore or video store having available for customers, patrons, or members, any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any video or motion picture must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the store, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
(a)  Each booth, room, or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
(b)  Each booth, room or cubicle shall have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the store is located. 
(c)  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
(d)  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleaned. 
(e)  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room, or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room, or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(4)  Definition of Video Store. "Video store" means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade which includes videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising five (5) percent or more of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos. The term "video store" shall include "adult video stores" as defined in chapter 4, section 4.1.2. The term "adult bookstore" shall be as defined in section 4.1.2. 
(5)  Enforcement. The provisions of this ordinance may, in addition to any criminal remedy available, be enforced through an action for abatement of a nuisance in the manner provided by law. The city may apply to a court with jurisdiction to grant equitable relief to abate or remove private video viewing booths and to restrain or enjoin any person from operating or engaging in conduct contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2001-09-05, Added, 09/05/2001) 
Article 10.12 - Charitable Solicitation 

Section 10.12.1 - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Solicit shall mean to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. 
Public area shall mean an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including but not limited to alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
Charitable organization shall mean those entities defined and registered as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-17 et seq. 
(2004-05-10, Added, 05/03/2004) 
Section 10.12.2 - Permit Requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or corporation to solicit within any public right-of-way in the City of Roswell, provided, however, recognized charitable organizations as defined herein and governmental entities may solicit within the public right-of-way provided they first obtain a permit in accordance with sections 10.9.4 through 10.9.7 of this chapter. 
(2004-05-10, Added, 05/03/2004) 
Section 10.12.3 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to soliciting activities within the public areas of the City of Roswell. It is not meant to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. Rather, its goal is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitations that have become an unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city. 
(2004-05-10, Added, 05/03/2004) 
Article 10.14 - Used Automobile Establishments 

Section 10.14.1 - Definitions. 
Automobile Sales Establishment: A place of business where a manufacturer authorized business or dealer engages in the sale of new and used automobiles, trucks, tractors, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, campers, motorcycles, agricultural implement and equipment and other motorized vehicle sales, leasing, rental, and service where a majority of the sales inventory is new. 
Automotive Services Establishment: A business including, but not limited to, rental car facilities, top and body, paint shop, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops, car washes, including automated and staffed facilities, and oil change and lubrication facilities. 
Automobile Broker: A business or person who, for a commission or with the intent to make a profit or gain of money or other thing of value, negotiates or attempts to negotiate the sale of a new or used automobile on behalf of another without taking possession of the vehicle. Such term shall not mean any person engaged in the solicitation, negotiation, or advertising of the sale of used automobiles or any owner of real property who allows the display of used automobile on such property if the sale of such vehicles is made by a used car dealer or a financial institution. 
Used Automobile: Any pre-owned, leased, or second-hand motor vehicle to which a certificate of title and license plates have been issued and which at a prior time the motor vehicle has been registered for use on the highways by a consumer or by a dealer, and any used or second-hand vehicle, defined as any vehicle required to be titled, trailer coaches, and trailers weighing over two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds. 
Automobile Dealer or Business: A person or business who brokers, deals, or engages in the purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of five (5) or more used automobiles within a twelve-month period or two (2) or more used automobiles at any one point in time. 
Used Automobile Sales Establishment: A place of business where a business or dealer engages in the sale of used automobiles as defined herein. 
Used Automobile Lot: Any place where used automobiles are displayed and offered for purchase, sale, lease, or exchange in the open by a used automobile dealer or used automobile business. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-03, § 5, 05/12/2008) 
Section 10.14.2 - License Requirements and Procedure for Obtaining a Used Automobile Establishment License. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall operate as a used automobile sales establishment within the city without a used automobile sales establishment license as herein provided. 
(b)  A separate used automobile sales establishment license shall be required for each existing used automobile lot. 
(c)  The city is hereby authorized to issue a used automobile sales establishment license upon submission by the applicant of a written application on forms to be provided by the city and upon compliance by the applicant with the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the inspection services department of the city written detailed plans showing the layout of land to be used, the portion thereof to be improved as required herein, method proposed for improvement, drainage, driveways for ingress and egress, and buildings to be built or existing buildings to be used in the operation of the existing used automobile lot. The application shall also be accompanied by written evidence that he/she has obtained all applicable zoning, use, or site plan approvals/permits required to be obtained prior to operating a used automobile sales establishment in the proposed location in the city. The granting of a used automobile sales establishment license shall be contingent on obtaining all applicable zoning, use, or site plan approvals/permits. 
(2)  The applicant must furnish evidence that he/she possesses a valid State of Georgia used vehicle dealer's license for the each proposed location. 
(3)  Payment of an annual city used automobile sales establishment license fee as required by the city's current business license ordinance. 
(d)  All used automobile sales establishment licenses issued under this article shall be for a period of one (1) year expiring on December 31 of each year. The city is hereby authorized to issue a renewal city used automobile sales establishment license upon expiration of the initial license upon written application on forms to be provided by the city accompanied by the required renewal city used automobile sales establishment license fee and a determination by the city that the applicant is complying with all of the provisions of this article. 
(e)  No city used automobile sales establishment license issued under this article may be transferred except upon written application by the licensee and the proposed transferee on forms to be provided by the city and the payment of a transfer fee as determined by the business fee. Provided, however, the transferee shall be required to furnish any and all information as may be contained in an initial application for a city used automobile sales establishment license. Prior to transferring any city used automobile sales establishment license, the city shall determine that the existing used automobile lot for the city used automobile sales establishment license has been issued is complying with all of the provisions of this article, provided however that the improvements required under chapter 10.38 may be waived by the planning director for an existing used automobile lot. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-03, § 5, 05/12/2008) 
Section 10.14.3 - Regulations. 
Each licensee under this article shall comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  Keep his/her premises in a neat and clean condition. He/she shall not allow any used motor vehicles that are part of his/her inventory to encroach upon any right-of-way of the city. 
(b)  Not allow any loud or boisterous noises, including outdoor public address systems, to emanate from his/her place of business, either by persons congregating there or by the playing of recording instruments, radios, and/or television sets or other sound-producing equipment as controlled by Roswell City Code Article 8.8 Nuisances as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-03, § 5, 05/12/2008) 
Section 10.14.4 - Revocation. 
Any used automobile sales establishment license issued under this article shall be automatically revoked upon termination, suspension, revocation, or failure to renew the licensee's State of Georgia used vehicle dealer's license or upon proof by competent legal evidence that the licensee has made a false statement in any application for a city used automobile sales establishment license filed under this article. 
Any such used automobile sales establishment license may be revoked by the city council in their discretion upon proof of conviction of the licensee for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05-03, § 5, 05/12/2008) 
Article 10.15 - Mobile Food Vendors 

Section 10.15.1 - Definitions. 
(a)  Commissary shall mean an approved catering establishment, restaurant, or other approved place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
(b)  Mobile food vendor shall mean a retail food establishment that reports to and operates from a commissary and is readily moveable, is a motorized wheeled vehicle, or a towed wheeled vehicle designed and equipped to serve food. 
(c)  Pushcart shall mean a non-self-propelled vehicle limited to serving commissary prepared or prepackaged food and non-potentially hazardous food, unless the equipment is commercially designed and approved to handle food preparation and service. Pushcarts shall not be required to comply with mobile vehicular safety requirements. 
(d)  Temporary food establishment shall mean a retail food establishment, other than a licensed mobile food vendor or pushcart, that is not intended to be permanent and that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(e)  Ice cream truck shall mean a motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice sherbets or other frozen desserts of any kind are carried for the purpose of retail sale on the streets of the city. 
(2012-03-02, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 10.15.2 - License Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, food of any type from a commissary, mobile retail food establishment, pushcart or temporary food establishment without a license first having been granted under this section, except for city-sponsored events. 
(b)  An application for a license or a permit hereunder shall be submitted to the community development director or his or her designee setting forth all information required hereunder and in compliance with this ordinance. The community development director or his or her designee shall develop a form of application for the purpose of compliance with this article. 
(c)  The following information shall be provided with each application for a mobile food vendor permit: 
(1)  Name of the mobile food vendor; 
(2)  Make, model, and license plate number of vending unit; 
(3)  Owner's contact information; 
(4)  Operator's contact information; 
(5)  Type of vendor (street vending unit or sidewalk vending unit); 
(6)  Copy of approved permit from the Fulton County Health Department; 
(7)  List of operating locations and times; 
(8)  Signatures from property owners indicating consent for the use of their property; 
(9)  Signature of applicant indicating agreement to the listed requirements. 
(2012-03-02, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 10.15.3 - Prohibited Conduct and Requirements. 
(a)  Except for ice cream trucks, no mobile food vendor shall conduct business or operate in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  A mobile food vendor shall not operate on any private property without the prior consent of the owner. 
(c)  A mobile food vendor shall maintain a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) liability insurance policy. Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Georgia, protecting the mobile food vendor, the public and the city from all claims for damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without thirty (30) days advanced written notice to the city. 
(d)  Except for ice cream trucks, a mobile food vendor shall not make sounds or announcements to call attention to the mobile food vehicle either while traveling on the public rights-of-way or when stationary. At all times said mobile food vendor shall be in compliance with the City of Roswell noise ordinance. 
(e)  The license under which a mobile food vendor is operating must be firmly attached and visible on the mobile food vendor or pushcart at all times. 
(f)  Any driver of a mobile food vendor motorized vehicle must possess a valid Georgia driver's license. 
(g)  Except for ice cream trucks, mobile food vendors are allowed only in commercial zoning districts. 
(h)  Mobile food vendors shall not be located within fifteen (15) feet of any street intersection or pedestrian crosswalk or ten (10) feet of any driveway. 
(i)  No sale or offer for sale shall be made by any mobile food vendor between 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. unless such sale is in conjunction with a city-approved special event or film production permit. 
(j)  Vending structures shall not be left unattended or stored at any time on the open vending site when vending is not taking place or during restricted hours of operation. 
(k)  No sale or offer for sale of ice cream, frozen milk, frozen dairy or ice confection products shall be made from a mobile food vendor unless each side of the vehicle is marked, in letters and numbers at least three inches in height, with the name and address of the mobile food vendor licensee. 
(l)  The mobile food vendor shall comply with all state, federal and local health and safety regulations and requirements and shall obtain and maintain any and all licenses required by any other health, organization or governmental organization having jurisdiction over this subject matter. 
(m)  The following safety regulations shall apply to any and all vehicles operating under this article or used for mobile retail food establishments: 
(1)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm with a sound distinguishable from the surrounding noise level. 
(2)  Every vehicle shall be equipped with two rear-vision mirrors, one at each side, firmly attached to the outside of the motor vehicle, and so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway to the rear, along both sides of the vehicle. 
(n)  The mobile food vendor may sell food and non-alcoholic beverage items only. 
( 2018-11-17 , § 1, Amended, 11/26/2018; 2012-03-02, § 1, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 10.15.4 - Indemnity. 
As part of the permitting process set forth herein, any person or entity receiving a permit set forth herein shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing the City of Roswell, its agents, employees and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions and suits of any type whatsoever. 
(2012-03-02, § 1, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 10.15.5 - Revocation and Suspension. 
The city shall have the right to revoke or suspend any license granted hereunder. 
(2012-03-02, § 1, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 10.15.6 - Fee. 
The fee for every application for license under this section shall be set by resolution. 
(2012-03-02, § 1, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Article 10.16 - Fireworks[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-08-13 , § 1, adopted Aug. 8, 2016, amended art. 10.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. 10.16, §§ 10.16.1—10.16.4, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-08-22 , § 1, Added Aug. 10, 2015. 

Section 10.16.1 - License to Sell Fireworks. 
Consumer fireworks and/or fireworks and other terms or phrases not otherwise defined herein shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1. A State of Georgia issued consumer fireworks distributor license is required to sell fireworks within the City of Roswell. 
( 2016-08-13 , § 1, Amended 08/08/2016) 
Section 10.16.2 - Where Fireworks Can Be Sold. 
(a)  Consumer fireworks can be sold from a "permanent consumer fireworks retail sales facilities" or from "temporary structures for the retail sale of consumer fireworks" only in the CX- Commercial Mixed Use, CC- Commercial Corridor and CH- Commercial Heavy identified Unified Development Code (UDC) zoning districts. 
(b)  As provided by state law, consumer fireworks may be sold from a "store" or "temporary structures for the retail sale of consumer fireworks" if such facility or structure complies with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association. 
(c)  "Temporary structures for the retail sale of fireworks" must be set-up within one thousand (1,000) feet of a fire hydrant or a fire department connection of a building unless otherwise determined by the City of Roswell Fire Chief. Beginning January 1, 2016 and thereafter, a distributor selling from a temporary consumer firework retail sales structure or stand shall pay a license fee of $500.00 per location to the City of Roswell and shall meet all state requirements. Such license fees shall be used by the city for public safety purposes. 
( 2016-08-13 , § 1, Amended 08/08/2016) 
Section 10.16.3 - Use, Prohibited Conduct, Hours of Use and Special Use Permits. 
(a)  Consumer fireworks may only be ignited, used or exploded on any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up and including the ending time of 9:00 p.m. On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year consumer fireworks may be ignited, used or exploded up to and including an end time of 11:59 p.m. On January 1 of each year consumer fireworks may also be ignited, used or exploded beginning at 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. If at any time these hours conflict with state law, state law shall control. The city may, in its sole discretion, grant special use permits for igniting, using or exploding consumer fireworks outside of these hours for a fee not to exceed the maximum allowed by state law. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks may not be ignited, used or exploded indoors; in the public right of way; on property of others without their consent; within any park, historic site, recreational area or other area owned by the city. Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, used or exploded within one hundred (100) yards of a water treatment plant; waste water treatment plant; a gas station or a facility that refines, processes, or blends gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids or gases where the volume stored is in excess of five hundred (500) gallons; any public or private electric substation; a platform designed for landing use by helicopters, or a jail or prison. Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, used or exploded within one hundred (100) yards of a hospital, nursing home or other health care facility regulated under O.C.G.A. Title 31 Chapter 7 without written consent of the owner or operator of such facility. 
(c)  All persons selling and/or offering for sale consumer fireworks, igniting, using and/or exploding consumer fireworks, or possessing, manufacturing transporting or storing consumer fireworks, must meet age requirements as provided by state law. 
( 2016-08-13 , § 1, Amended 08/08/2016) 
Section 10.16.4 - Special Use Permit. 
Any person wishing to use or explode any fireworks outside of the permitted hours contained in state law or herein, may apply to the Roswell City Administrator or her designee for a special use permit. Such application shall designate the time or times and location that such consumer fireworks are to be used or exploded and shall provide such other information as may be required by the City of Roswell Fire Chief and the City of Roswell Police Chief. Such application shall be remitted to the city administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event. The cost of a special use permit for consumer fireworks shall be $100.00 and no city official or employee shall bear any liability for the issuance of such permit. 
( 2016-08-13 , § 1, Amended 08/08/2016) 
Article 10.17 - Motor Vehicle Rental Excise Tax 

Section 10.17.1 - Definitions. 
The definitions in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-91 apply to this article and are incorporated herein as though fully set out. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 1, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.2 - Authority and Records. 
(a)  The city administrator or designee shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every motor vehicle rental concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city administrator or designee may require. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 2, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.3 - Excise Tax Levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq., on any motor vehicle rental charge made in the city. The tax levied pursuant to this article is in the amount of three (3) percent of the rental charge. 
(b)  The council declares that the proceeds received from the excise tax levied by this article are to be expended to provide additional funding to promote industry, trade, commerce and tourism or for capital projects related to sports, conventions, recreational facilities or public safety facilities or for the maintenance of such facilities. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 3, Added 05/14/2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy and collect excise tax on rental of motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-93. 
Section 10.17.4 - Exceptions. 
The tax levied by this article is subject to the exemptions and exclusions provided by state law. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 4, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.5 - Statement Required Showing Gross Rental Charges and Taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month, the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 5, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.6 - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said record is open for inspection and copying by the city administrator, or his designee, during business hours. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 6, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.7 - Deficiency Determinations. 
(a)  If it appears that a return for excise tax or the amount of tax remitted is inaccurate or incomplete, the city administrator or designee may compute and determine the amount required to be paid based on any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One (1) deficiency determination may be made for the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city administrator or designee shall bear interest the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found due by him. 
(c)  The city administrator or designee shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and if by mail the service is addressed to the operator of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city administrator or designee as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 7, Added 05/14/2018) 
State Law reference— Duty to adopt procedures for imposition, payment, and collection of excise taxes on rental motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-95. 
Section 10.17.8 - Audit Authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 8, Added 05/14/2018) 
State Law reference— Information regarding excise taxes on rental motor vehicles to be included in audit report, §§ 36-81-7 and 48-13-96. 
Section 10.17.9 - Withholding Tax on Sale of Business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city administrator or designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser is personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 9, Added 05/14/2018) 
Section 10.17.10 - Penalty; Expiration of Tax. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1.1.3 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article is effective on July 1, 2018, and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law. 
( 2018-05-05 , § 10, Added 05/14/2018) 
Chapter 11 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Article 11.1 - In General[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts are established, maintained and operated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1. 

Section 11.1.1 - Court Personnel. 
As set forth in Article VI of the Charter of the City of Roswell, the functions of the municipal court shall be carried out by a judge, a clerk of court, a solicitor, court marshals and such other employees as deemed necessary to ensure the effective operation of the court and the timely administration of justice. 
Section 11.1.2 - Solicitor—Qualifications and Compensation. 
Upon recommendation of the city administrator, the mayor is authorized, with the approval of the city council, to appoint a solicitor of the municipal court of the City of Roswell. The solicitor is hereby authorized to prosecute all cases coming before Municipal Court of the City of Roswell for the City of Roswell. The city may also appoint qualified assistant solicitors to act in the solicitor's place and stead in case of temporary absences or as necessary. The solicitor and assistant solicitors must be permitted to practice law in all the courts of the State of Georgia and be members in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia. 
The compensation of the solicitor shall be fixed by the city council. Before entering upon duties of the office, the solicitor shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality. 
( Ord. No. 2015-04-07, § 1, 04/13/2015 ) 
Section 11.1.3 - Court Rules; Internal Operating Procedures. 
The municipal court shall be controlled by the rules of the superior courts, as far as they are applicable to municipal courts, and a sound construction of the Constitutions of the state and the United States and the Charter and ordinances of the city. When necessary, the judge or clerk of court may adopt internal operating procedures which shall be formally adopted and made available to the public and members of the bar. 
Section 11.1.4 - Continuance of Cases. 
Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. The judge may grant continuations of a case. 
Section 11.1.5 - Fines; Enforcement by Levy and Execution; Payment in Advance of Court Date. 
For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the court clerk and collected as tax executions are collected. 
Persons charged with traffic violations or other offenses as specified by the judge may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged. Those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and other serious offenses, as determined by the judge, shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
Section 11.1.6 - Judgment and Sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(a)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(b)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(c)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(d)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one (1) or more fixed dates in the future. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose jail term, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c) and 36-32-5. 
Section 11.1.7 - Contempt of Court. 
Any person who, during a sitting of the municipal court, shall be guilty of contempt of court, or refuse to abide by any sentence of such court, shall be punished in accordance with section 1.1.3. 
Article 11.2 - Appearance Bonds 

Section 11.2.1 - Appearance Bond; Procedure for Accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(a)  The judge or any other officer designated by the judge, may accept bond of the accused conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the municipal court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(b)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the judge of the municipal court. 
(c)  A person cited for violation of a city ordinance may be released on his own recognizance if the arresting officer, police chief or judge makes a determination based on all surrounding circumstances and in his good sound discretion that the person charged will appear at the time set for the court. 
(d)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11 any person cited for a traffic offense shall be released in lieu of bail upon showing his or her drivers license. 
(e)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
Section 11.2.2 - Forfeiture of Appearance Bonds. 
The judge shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for non-appearance, the judge shall at the end of the day enter on the docket where the case is stated "Bond forfeited," or similar words. 
Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall, after 60 days, be paid to the city administration department and it shall become the property of the city provided that the conditions specified in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-72 do not apply. 
Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
Section 11.2.3 - Failure or Refusal to Give Bond; Subsequent Confinement. 
If the accused or a witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required under this article, the person so failing or refusing may be confined or kept under guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
Section 11.2.4 - Professional Bondsman. 
No professional bondsman shall be accepted as surety on a bail bond unless he holds a current business license in the city, is approved by the Fulton County Sheriff, and has fully complied with all other City of Roswell requirements for bonding companies. 
Chapter 13 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Article 13.1 - Offenses Involving Public Peace and Order 

Section 13.1.1 - Disorderly Conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of such person's life limb or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of gaming; 
(5)  Be in or about any place, alone or with others, with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable thing or to aid or abet any person doing so; 
(6)  Be in or about any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs are practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purpose of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of such illegal drugs, narcotics or alcohol; 
(7)  Direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(8)  Interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  Congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear that public way after being ordered to do so by a city police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  Stand or remain in or about any street, sidewalk, overpass, or public way so as to impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear such street, sidewalk, overpass or public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(11)  Disrupt by actions which tend to cause an immediate breach of the peace or the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, or home for the elderly; 
(12)  Throw bottles, paper, cans, glass sticks, stones, missiles, or any other debris on public property; 
(13)  To publicly expose, post or circulate any lewd, profane or obscene picture, card or printing within the city or 
( 2015-08-20 , § 1, Amended 08/10/2015; Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 1, Amended, 03/10/2014) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Section 13.1.2 - Public Indecency. 
(a)  Purpose: This section is enacted for the purposes, among others, of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the City of Roswell, Georgia; protecting societal order and reflecting moral disapproval of people appearing in the nude in public places. 
(b)  Prohibitions: A person shall be prohibited, while in a public place, from knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appearing in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondling the genitals of himself/herself or another person. 
(c)  Definitions: As used in this section: 
Accessible to the public means any area or place, including, but not limited to any building, structure or business, where the public is invited and are free to go upon special or implied invitation, including but not limited to such an area or place available to all or a certain segment of the public. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or cleft of the buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Public place means an area or place, including but not limited to any building, structure or business, accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
(d)  Exception: Subsection (b)(3) shall not apply when the nudity is part of some larger form of expression that merits First Amendment protection pursuant to the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Section 13.1.3 - Discharge of Weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, air gun, BB gun, bow, or crossbow projecting lead or any missile, except as authorized by permit secured from the city administrator or his designee. The city administrator or his/her designee shall issue permits for the discharge of firearms, air guns, BB guns, bows or crossbows as to ensure the safety of the public. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging a weapon when lawfully defending person or property. 
(b)  In order to obtain a permit to discharge a firearm within the City of Roswell, such activity shall be conducted wholly within an approved and permitted indoor firing range. 
(c)  In order to obtain a permit to discharge an air gun, BB gun, bow or crossbow within the City of Roswell, such activity shall meet at a minimum the following criteria: 
(1)  A sufficient backstop must be provided to prohibit the projectile from leaving the property. A projectile entering a neighboring property as a result of the discharge is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(2)  The target or any piece of the target is prohibited from unreasonably leaving the property as a result of the discharge. 
(3)  The discharge of the weapon must be on the applicant's own land or the applicant must have express written permission of the property's owner to discharge such a weapon on the property of another. 
(4)  If discharging a weapon within one hundred fifty (150) feet from a property line, any such discharge shall be toward the interior of the parcel upon which the discharge is occurring. 
(5)  All applicants must have taken and passed a state approved safety course, or obtained certification in the safe discharge of weapons, or show specific proof of training in the safe discharge of weapons. 
(6)  No permit shall be obtained by a person under the age of eighteen (18), provided however, that this provision shall not prohibit a person under the age of eighteen (18) from the discharge of a permitted weapon if accompanied by and under the direct supervision of a permitted adult. 
(7)  Upon request by an officer or other authorized official, a permit shall be available and be presented. Failure to timely provide such permit shall be a violation of this section. 
(8)  The discharge of a weapon must be on properties specified in such permit. 
(9)  The city administrator shall be authorized to obtain any other information deemed appropriate in the issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Any person discharging a firearm, air gun, BB gun, bow or crossbow within the City of Roswell in violation of this article or any person discharging a firearm, air gun, BB gun, bow or crossbow without a permit or in violation of the permit criteria shall be punished as set forth in section 1.1.3 of this Code, shall have an issued permit automatically revoked and shall not be eligible for a permit to discharge a weapon within the City of Roswell for a period of five (5) years. 
(2005-08-11, Amended, 08/15/2005) 
Section 13.1.4 - Vandalism. 
(a)  Public property. It is unlawful for any person to mar, deface, disfigure, spoil, ruin, damage, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any public property or park in the city. 
(b)  Private property. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to mar, deface, disfigure, spoil, ruin, damage, or in any way alter the appearance or operation of any private property without the consent of the owner. 
(2)  This subsection shall not be construed as affecting any remedy the private property owner may have at law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21. 
Section 13.1.5 - Panhandling. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive panhandling means and includes: 
(1)  Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person or his vehicle in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent; 
(2)  Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Continuing to solicit within five (5) feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(4)  Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to article 18.4 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(5)  Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or words intended to, or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(6)  Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access including, but not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, play grounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public 
Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business or contributions or to request the sale of goods or services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation to aggressively panhandle within any public area in the city or panhandle or solicit funds for the sole benefit of the solicitor: 
(1)  In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or subway station or stop; 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facilities. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(3)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; or 
(4)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(c)  Applicability. This article regulates the time, place and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons from exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.6 - Loitering and Prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.7 - Prostitution. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Prostitution. The act or practice of engaging in sexual activity for money or its equivalent. This includes, but is not limited to, acts also known as "sodomy for hire," and "masturbation for hire." 
(2)  Solicit for prostitution. Any person who offers to pay money or the equivalent for another to perform or engage in sexual activity. 
(3)  Purchase of prostitution. Paying money or its equivalent to another person to perform or to engage in sexual activity. 
(4)  Sexual activity. The touching of another's breast, vagina, penis or anus. Both persons (the person touching and the person touched) are said to engage in sexual activity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to engage in prostitution within the city limits. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to solicit prostitution or to purchase prostitution within the city limits. 
(d)  Violation of this Code section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 or by one hundred eighty (180) days imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Section 13.1.8 - Public Intoxication. 
Any person on the streets, sidewalks or other public places within the corporate limits of the city, who acts in a reckless manner so as to create an unreasonable risk to himself, to others, or to property in the vicinity while under the influence of alcohol or drugs is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.9 - Hindrance of a Police Officer. 
No person shall in any manner oppose or interfere, by acts or menaces, any police officer in the discharge of his official duties, or strike, assault, molest or abuse such officer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
State Law reference— Obstruction or hindering of law enforcement officers, OCGA § 16-10-24. 
Section 13.1.10 - False Representations to Police or to any City Department, Employee or Agent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or on behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file, orally or in writing, any false representation of fact to any police officer of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly and willfully and with intent thereby to mislead, either in such person's own behalf or on behalf of others, as principal or as agent, to make or file, orally or in writing, any false representation of fact to any department, employee or agent of the city government regarding any application for a permit, license, or any other official city matter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.11 - Loitering for the Purpose of Using, Possessing or Selling Any Controlled Substances. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of illegally using, possessing or selling any controlled substances as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36, as now enacted or hereafter amended. Among the circumstance which may be considered in determining whether such a purpose is manifested are: 
1.  The person is a known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances, or the person is at a location frequented by persons who illegally use, possess, transfer or sell controlled substances; and 
2.  The person repeatedly beckons to, stops, attempts to stop or engage in conversation with passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, for the purposes of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substances; or 
3.  The person repeatedly passes to or receives from passersby, whether such passersby are on foot or in a motor vehicle, money, objects or written material for the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to illegally possess, transfer or buy any controlled substance. 
(b)  In order for there to be a violation of subsection (1), the person's affirmative language or conduct must be such as to demonstrate by its expressed or implied content or appearance a specific intent to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to illegally possess, transfer or buy a controlled substance. 
(c)  No arrest shall be made for a violation of subsection A unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain his conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating subsection (a), if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, a "known illegal user, possessor or seller of controlled substances" is a person who, within one (1) year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section, has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of illegally manufacturing, using, possessing, selling, purchasing or delivering any controlled substance. 
(e)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 3/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.12 - Petty Trespass. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter upon the land or premises of another, or in or upon any vehicle, boat or aircraft owned by another, after having received notice from the owner, lawful occupier, lessee, tenant, or any agent thereof, that entry is forbidden. If requested by the owner, lawful occupier, lessee, tenant, or any agent thereof, of the premises, or vehicle, boat or aircraft, a police officer may give such notice. 
(b)  After notice as provided in subsection (a) of this Code section has been given, it shall be unlawful for a person to remain upon the land or premises of another, or in or upon any vehicle, boat or aircraft owned by another. 
(c)  Violation of this Code section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by 180 days imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03-04, § 2, Added, 03/10/2014) 
Section 13.1.13 - Required Proper Identification Required. 
(a)  Any establishment, person or entity selling cigarettes, tobacco products, tobacco related objects, alternative nicotine products (including "Juul," gummies and/or similar products), and/or vaping products as these terms are defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-170 shall require any and all persons attempting to purchase such products to proper identification as defined by state law showing that they are eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(b)  Violations of subsection (a) of this section shall be punished under section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
( 2019-01-01 , § 1, Added 01/14/2019) 
Article 13.2 - False Alarms 

Section 13.2.1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Burglar alarm system means any assembly of equipment or device, whether mechanical or electrical, arranged or designed to signal by any means the occurrence of an illegal entry into the premises or any other activity requiring urgent police attention and to which the police department may reasonably be expected to respond; provided, however, that this definition does not include alarm systems installed exclusively for the purpose of signaling an ongoing robbery, fire or medical emergency, and does not include any alarm system installed in a motor vehicle. 
Burglar alarm user means the person or other entity which owns, leases, rents, manages, possesses or has primary control over the premises in which a burglar alarm system is installed or maintained. 
Chief of police means the Chief of the City of Roswell Police Department or his designee. 
False alarm means the activation of a signal from a burglar or fire alarm system which elicits a response from the police or fire and rescue department when there is in fact no emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity necessitating such a response. This definition includes, without being limited to, any burglar alarm system signal activated as a result of weather, negligence, accident, mechanical failure, electrical failure, electrical surge, signals activated intentionally in nonemergency situations and signals activated where the actual cause of such activation is unknown. There is a rebuttable presumption that an activated burglar or fire alarm system signal is a false alarm if the responding personnel, after following normal procedures in their response and investigation, find no evidence of unauthorized entry, criminal activity or other emergency. An activated alarm system signal shall not be considered a false alarm if: 
(a)  The police or fire and rescue department is notified to cancel its response by the alarm user or the alarm user's monitoring agent prior to the time emergency personnel arrive at the premises; 
(b)  The burglar or fire alarm system signal was intentionally activated by an individual based upon a reasonable belief that an emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity requiring immediate response existed; or 
(c)  The burglar or fire alarm system signal was activated by lightening or other act of nature resulting in an electrical surge which causes physical damage to the alarm system and which damage is evidenced by the written report of a licensed alarm system contractor who conducted an inspection of the system at the premises and personally observed such physical damage. 
Fire alarm means any assembly of equipment or device, whether mechanical or electrical, arranged or designed to signal by any means the occurrence of a fire at the premises. 
Police department means the City of Roswell Police Department. 
Premises means the building or structure or any portion of a building or structure in which there is installed or maintained a burglar alarm system. 
Section 13.2.2 - Legislative Findings and Purposes of Article. 
The mayor and council find that emergency response to false alarms creates additional risks to public safety by diverting limited public safety resources away from both real emergencies and normal patrol activities intended and designed to prevent criminal acts. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to promote public safety by making burglar and fire alarm users in the City of Roswell directly responsible for preventing false alarms. 
Section 13.2.3 - Registration of Burglar and Fire Alarm Systems. 
(a)  No later than five (5) business days following the installation of any burglar or fire alarm system, the alarm user shall provide the following information to the chief of police: 
(1)  The complete name, address and phone number of the alarm user; 
(2)  The names of all persons authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system signal as well as all phone numbers at which such persons can be reached; 
(3)  The name and telephone number of the alarm user's monitoring agent, if any; and 
(4)  If known, the name and telephone number of the person or entity which installed the alarm system. 
(b)  Any changes in the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section must be reported to the chief of police within five (5) business days. Burglar or fire alarm users utilizing alarm systems installed prior to the effective date of this article shall provide the information set forth in subsection (a) of this section to the chief of police no later than sixty (60) days following such effective date, unless sooner requested in writing by the chief of police. 
(c)  The registration requirements of this subsection shall not apply where the alarm system is installed in premises used exclusively for residential purposes; provided, however, upon the occurrence of the third false alarm within any calendar year at any such premises used exclusively for residential purposes, the chief of police is authorized to require in writing that the alarm user comply with the registration requirements within five (5) business days. 
Section 13.2.4 - Required Alarm System Signal Deactivation. 
No burglar or fire alarm system installed after the effective date of this article shall be used unless such system is equipped with a mechanism or device that automatically deactivates the alarm system signal no later than thirty (30) minutes after activation. 
Section 13.2.5 - Monitoring of False Alarms; Enforcement of Article. 
The chief of police shall receive and maintain all information required to implement the terms of this article and shall be responsible for its enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the issuance of a citation and prosecution in the City of Roswell Municipal Court, or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 13.2.6 - Prohibited Acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any burglar or fire alarm user to cause, allow or permit three (3) or more false alarms in any calendar year. It shall also be a violation of this article for any burglar or fire alarm user to fail or otherwise refuse to comply with the registration or equipment requirements set forth in sections 13.2.3 and 13.2.4. 
(b)  No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or report a false alarm of fire or false request for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
Section 13.2.7 - Penalties for Violation of Article. 
Upon conviction, violations of this article shall be punished as follows: 
(a)  For the third and each subsequent false alarm that occurs at the same premises within any calendar year, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of $50.00; provided, however, that no burglar alarm user shall be assessed fines in excess of $200.00 for false alarms that occur at the same premises in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(b)  For all other violations of this article, not including false alarms, a fine shall be assessed in the amount of $100.00 and, in addition thereto, the violator may be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
(c)  Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
False alarms shall not be counted for purposes of assessing the penalties provided for in subsection (a) of this section so long as such false alarms occur within ten (10) days following the installation of the burglar or fire alarm system. 
Article 13.4 - Vehicle Immobilization Services 

Section 13.4.1 - Compliance Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator or vehicle immobilization service to operate within the municipal limits of the City of Roswell without complying with this article. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.2 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Impound shall mean any means to prohibit a motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation, either by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device or by towing. 
On-site vehicle immobilization services shall mean entities that do not operate parking facilities as their primary purpose and that use vehicle immobilization devices as a method of parking control including, but not limited to, educational institutions, houses of worship, restaurants, shopping centers and freestanding establishments with adjacent parking for patrons, customers, or invitees. 
Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
Vehicle immobilization device, device or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.3 - License to Operate a Vehicle Immobilization Service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service to operate within the territorial limits of the city without having obtained a license granted by the chief of police, or his or her designee, as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service to be licensed hereunder if that vehicle immobilization service is also engaged in the business of parking lot ownership or operations or valet parking operations within the municipal limits of the City of Roswell. 
(c)  Every vehicle immobilization service desiring to obtain a license required by this article shall file an application with the City of Roswell Police Department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant; where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers; the charges to be imposed for various services; amounts and types of insurance held; such other information as may be required by the chief of police; and shall be sworn by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.4 - Permit to Operate as an Operator of a Vehicle Immobilization Service. 
(a)  Every operator desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall file an application with the city's police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, and telephone number; drivers license number or state issued identification number; and such other information as may be required by the chief of police and shall be sworn by the applicant. 
(b)  Once issued, operators shall carry with them their permit at all times when they are in the process of installing a vehicle immobilization device. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an operator without first having been fingerprinted by the Roswell Police Department and having been issued a permit by the city's police department indicating that such person is eligible to be an operator of a vehicle immobilization service or device. Any person denied a license under this section shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and city council. 
(d)  No person shall impound a vehicle by the use of a vehicle immobilization device unless they have obtained a permit to operate as an operator of a vehicle immobilization service. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to install vehicle immobilization devices on vehicles if such operator is engaged in the business of parking lot ownership or operations or valet parking operations within the municipal limits of the City of Roswell. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.5 - General Requirements for Applicants of a License or Permit. 
(a)  All applicants, whether they are a vehicle immobilization service or an operator, shall furnish all data, information and records relevant to their application requested of them by the city's police department, and failure to furnish this data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of the request shall automatically result in the dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. Applicants, by filing an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the Roswell Police Department or the city attorney's office, who is under the applicants' control and who possess or may possess knowledge of facts relevant to the application. The failure to produce a person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in an automatic dismissal of the application. Persons under an applicant's control are the partners of the applicant if the applicant is a partnership, the officers of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, and/or employees, officers or agents of the applicant. 
(b)  No license or permit under this article shall be issued to any person who has been convicted in this or any other country within three (3) years immediately prior to the application for a license or permit of a crime involving distribution or possession of illegal narcotics, sex offenses or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Further, to be eligible for a permit under this article, the person applying must possess a current driver's license or state issued identification as provided by the laws of the state. Any person denied a license or a permit under this section or any person whose license or permit may be revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal this denial or revocation to the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Should any person with a license or a permit obtained pursuant to this article be charged with committing any crime as described in subsection (b) above, then such charge shall constitute the basis for adverse action, including suspension or revocation. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.6 - Registration of Vehicles Used by a Vehicle Immobilization Service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or to operate within the city any vehicle assisting in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service without first having filed a registration for such vehicle with the city's police department on forms to be furnished by the department. All registrations for each vehicle utilized shall expire on December 31 of each year and shall be renewed between December 1 and December 31 of each year. The information for registration shall contain the following: 
(1)  The make, model and manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle; 
(2)  Date the vehicle was put into service to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service; 
(3)  The driver's license number of any operator of the vehicle; 
(4)  The name of the insurance company with which the owner of the vehicle and all operators have liability insurance coverage with respect to the operation of the vehicle, as required by law; 
(5)  The permit number of each operator who shall drive or operate the vehicle on behalf of the vehicle immobilization service; and 
(6)  Such other information related to the vehicle as may be required by the Roswell Police Department. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.7 - Application, License and Permit Fees. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a completed application, the non-refundable application fee for all applicants seeking a vehicle immobilization service license shall be $100.00. This application fee shall be submitted with the application and be made payable to the Roswell Police Department. 
(b)  Upon approval of an application for a vehicle immobilization service license, the annual license fee shall be $500.00. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a completed application, the non-refundable application fee for all applicants seeking an operator's permit shall be $25.00. This application fee shall be submitted with the application and be made payable to the city's police department. 
(d)  Upon approval of an application for an operator's permit, the annual permit fee shall be $50.00. 
(e)  The annual fees set forth in this section shall be prorated starting with the date the license or permit is issued to December 31 of the first year of operation as needed. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.8 - General Requirements for Vehicle Immobilization Services and Operators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to procure a license or a permit by fraudulent conduct or a false statement of a material fact. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to pay in the form of a gratuity any person who does not own or operate a commercial parking lot for information as to illegally parked vehicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to make any payment to an owner, employee, agent or a person in possession of a commercial parking lot in excess of the reasonable and customary fee ordinarily charged by the owner or person in possession of the parking lot for parking thereon, any such excess payment shall be considered a kickback. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to charge fees in excess of those set out in section 13.4.9 of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize any vehicle located on any portion of a public street within the city, unless properly authorized in writing by the chief of police of the city. 
(f)  A vehicle immobilization service must maintain a twenty-four-hour a day, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with a driver of a vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to immobilize vehicles at any off-street parking facility, vacant lot, or other private property without having a valid written contract specifically for such services entered into with the private property owner or lawful lessee thereof. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized within one (1) hour of being contacted by the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle. It shall also be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to fail to release vehicles from immobilization within thirty (30) minutes after receipt of payment from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle that has been immobilized by a vehicle immobilization device. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle immobilization service or operator to fail to provide a receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle. The receipt shall have the following information: the name, address, and phone number of the vehicle immobilization service or company and the name and signature or the person who applied/removed the boot or vehicle immobilization device. 
(j)  In the event that the application of a vehicle immobilization device damages a vehicle, then the service must pay the cost of repairs for that damage. 
(k)  In the event that the owner or operator of a vehicle, to which an immobilization device has been applied, attempts to operate said vehicle or remove the device, then the vehicle immobilization service is not liable for any damage to that vehicle. Additionally, the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle will be liable to the vehicle immobilization service for the cost of damage to the vehicle immobilization device. 
(l)  A vehicle immobilization service must procure reasonable insurance, as determined by the city's police department, to cover damage caused to vehicles by the use of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(m)  A vehicle immobilization service shall keep copies of permits issued to its operators under this article in their place of business so that they may be inspected by any member of the Roswell Police Department at any time. 
(n)  No immobilized vehicle shall be towed unless at least twenty-four (24) hours has expired from the time the vehicle was immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.9 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city's police department or the chief's designee may recommend the revocation, suspension, the imposition of a fine, or non-renewal of a license of a vehicle immobilization service or a permit of an operator for due cause. As used in this section, the term "due cause" includes the violation of any section of this article by a vehicle immobilization service or an operator. 
(b)  No adverse action shall be taken regarding any license or permit pursuant to this article until and after notice has been provided and a hearing has been held before the mayor and city council to determine just cause for such action. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of such license or permit and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(c)  The notice shall be served upon the license or permit holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license or permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license or permit holder cannot be found and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this section, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage, fully prepaid, addressed to the license or permit holder at the license or permit holder's place of business or residence at least thirteen (13) days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall conduct the hearings and report its conclusions and recommendations to the chief of police. The chief of police, upon receiving the report, shall, within sixty (60) days, deny applications for new licenses and shall revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any affected license. In lieu of suspension, revocation or the failure to renew, the mayor and city council may impose a fine upon any vehicle immobilization service or operator, such fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation of this article. The decision of the mayor and city council may be appealed to the Fulton County Superior Court by filing a writ of certiorari. 
(e)  Any vehicle immobilization service whose license has been revoked or an operator whose permit has been revoked pursuant to this code section shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for twelve (12) months immediately following the revocation. The violation of any provision of this article by any person with any ownership interest in a vehicle immobilization service may result in the revocation of the vehicle immobilization service's license. 
(f)  The actions of an operator working within the scope of his employment for a vehicle immobilization service can be attributed to the vehicle immobilization service for purposes of determining due cause under this section. 
(g)  The maximum fine for any violation of this article shall be $1,000.00. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.10 - Fees Charged by Vehicle Immobilization Service. 
(a)  Any vehicle immobilization service engaged in the business of the immobilization of vehicles shall not charge the owner of any immobilized vehicle or personal property in excess of $35.00 per day for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device or devices or the release from impoundment. The $35.00 fee shall be all-inclusive; no additional fees may be charged for using other equipment. 
(b)  Fees may be paid by cash, check, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.11 - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person hired by an owner of any private property, or his agent or employee, located within the territorial limits of the city to install or attach to any vehicle a vehicle immobilization device(s), boot(s), or other instrument(s) that is/are designed to, or have the effect of, restricting the normal movement of such vehicle or by any other means whatsoever to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle, unless the owner of the property, or his agent or employee, has complied with all applicable City Unified Development Code (UDC) regarding the posting of signs and the following requirements: 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions are to be effective. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. Any such sign or signs to be erected upon historic property as defined in the shall be located as approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(2)  Such signs shall be a minimum of seven and one-half (7½) square feet in area (two and one-half (2½) feet by three (3) feet). 
(3)  The bottom of such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four (4) feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, the bottom of such signs shall be six (6) feet above site grade. 
(4)  Such signs shall state in letters at least three (3) inches high that "Unauthorized vehicles may be impounded (towed or booted) at owner's risk and expense." Such signs shall also include the following language in letters at least two and one-half (2½) inches high: 
a.  Cost of impound—$35.00 per day; 
b.  Boot Removal—Call 000-000-0000 (substitute correct telephone number). 
c.  Tow information—Call 000-000-0000 (substitute correct telephone number). 
d.  Vehicle may not be impounded if owner/operator returns before boot or tow is attached. 
e.  Booted vehicles may only be towed after twenty-four (24) hours. 
f.  Complaints may be made to: 
Parking Company Call—000-000-0000 (substitute correct telephone number). 
Roswell Police Department—Call 770-640-4100. 
g.  This lot is owned or operated by (insert name) and can be reached at—Call 000-000-0000 (substitute correct number). 
(5)  The sign shall also include the hours during which free parking is permitted and the hours during which pay is required, as well as an explanation of the terms of payment. 
(6)  Misleading signs are prohibited. 
No abbreviations shall be used in the language contained in the sign. Where this Code section leaves a blank, the signs shall include the appropriate information. The lettering on such signs shall be black on a white, reflective background, and shall be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.12 - Lettering on Vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate within the territorial limits of the city any vehicle to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service unless the vehicle shall have displayed on each side in plain view the name of the vehicle immobilization service, the address from which the vehicle immobilization service is operating and the telephone number of the vehicle immobilization service. The lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the vehicle and shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inches in height. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.13 - Service Calls. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service, or the vehicle immobilization service's agent, representative, employee or operator to go to any place and immobilize a vehicle unless (1) called by the owner, owner's agent, representative or employee of a commercial parking lot; or (2) where a vehicle immobilization service has a contract to immobilize illegally parked cars at specific commercial parking lot. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.14 - City Employees Soliciting Business. 
It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any vehicle immobilization service owner or operator. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.15 - Solicitation of Vehicle Immobilization Work. 
It shall be unlawful to drive along any street within the city and solicit vehicle immobilization work. Solicitation work by the operator or the occupant of a vehicle used to carry on the business of a vehicle immobilization service is prohibited. An operator shall not proceed to a specific commercial lot without complying with section 13.4.12 of this article. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.16 - Vehicle not Mobilized upon Operator of Vehicle Returning. 
The operator of any vehicle immobilization services shall not immobilize a vehicle and shall not charge a fee if the driver of the vehicle returns before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.17 - License not in Lieu of Occupation Tax Certificate. 
The license issued under this article shall be cumulative and not in lieu of any business license or tax occupation certificate issued by the city. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Section 13.4.18 - Effective Date of Enforcement of Article. 
Those persons that are subject to this article shall have four (4) days from the date that this article becomes effective to comply with this article. 
(2002-03-01, Added, 03/18/2002) 
Chapter 14 - PARKS, RECREATION & CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
Article 14.1 - Recreation Commission[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 26, 2016, repealed the former art. 4.1, §§ 4.1.1, 4.1.2, and enacted a new art. 14.1 as set out herein. The former art. 14.1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-03-04, §§ 1, 2, Amended March 1, 2010. 

Section 14.1.1 - Recreation Commission. 
There is hereby created under provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5 a recreation commission consisting of seven (7) members. The recreation commission shall have all the powers set forth in such section. The recreation commission shall also oversee the Roswell Cultural Arts Center. Such oversight shall include the responsibility to (1) review and establish resident status for companies at the center; (2) establish rules and regulations governing the use of the center; and (3) approve lease agreements for use of the center and other cultural facilities of the city as designated by the mayor and city council. The recreation commission will submit their proposed budget to the mayor and city council for approval on or before May 1 of each year. The mayor will appoint all members to the recreation commission for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies on the commission occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term. All appointments shall be subject to the approval of city council. The chairman and other officers as may be deemed necessary by the commission shall be selected from the membership of the commission by the members of the commission, every two (2) years. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the commission officers, the recreation commission shall elect a member to fill the unexpired vacancy. Provided, further, that: 
(1)  Each member of the recreation commission shall reside in the City of Roswell at the time of appointment and at all times during which such person serves on the commission. However, if a serving member moves outside the city limits, such member may serve until his/her successor has been duly appointed, or for a maximum period of six (6) months, whichever is shorter. 
(2)  Each member of the recreation commission shall regularly attend functions of the commission including the regular monthly commission meetings, regular standing committee meetings and any called commission meetings and called standing committee meetings. Standing committees are established by the commission's bylaws. Any member who does not adhere to all minimum attendance requirements during any twelve-month period shall cause such person's position to be declared vacant and be filled in accordance with other provisions of this section. 
(3)  A member of the recreation commission shall not serve more than two (2) full consecutive terms after adoption of this ordinance, but may, at the election of mayor and council, be appointed to serve on another board or commission. If members of the recreation commission are currently serving an unexpired term, said term shall not be considered an initial term for purposes of these term limits. A position on the recreation commission currently being occupied by a holdover member shall either be filled by reappointment, with such reappointment being deemed an initial term for purposes of term limits, be filled by a newly appointed member or be deemed vacant six (6) months after adoption of this ordinance. A member whose term expires after adoption of this ordinance may serve until his/her successor has been duly appointed or for a maximum period of six (6) months, whichever is shorter. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 9/26/2016) 
Section 14.1.2 - Commission Meetings and Attendance. 
The minimum attendance requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Each member shall attend no less than eight (8) of the twelve (12) regular monthly commission meetings. 
(2)  Each member must attend no less than sixty-five (65) percent of all meetings of the commission and its standing committees. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 9/26/2016) 
Article 14.2 - Regulation of Use of Public Parks[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 26, 2016, repealed the former art. 14.2, §§ 14.2.1—14.2.6, and enacted a new art. 14.2 as set out herein. The former art. 14.2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-06-01, adopted June 4, 2001; Ord. No. 2006-04-06, adopted April 17, 2006; Ord. No. 2008-02-02, adopted Feb. 4, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-11-16, § 1, adopted Nov. 16, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-07-13, § 1, adopted July 12, 2010; Ord No. 2015-09-25, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-07-12 , § 1, adopted July 25, 2016. 

Section 14.2.1 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all municipal public parks which are defined for purposes of this article as any park, playground or place to which the general public has access and a right to frequent, for business, entertainment, or for other lawful purposes, and which has been either deeded to or dedicated to public use or ownership. Municipal public parks shall also include the sidewalks abutting any park, playground or place above described unless clearly delineated otherwise by the mayor and city council. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Section 14.2.2 - Recreation Director; Powers and Duties. 
The director of the recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or employees under the direction of the director shall: 
(1)  Implement and support the policies of the Roswell Recreation Commission. 
(2)  Develop, direct, and implement the Recreation and Parks Master Plan for the City of Roswell. 
(3)  Coordinate with the appropriate entities to implement the community cultural plan as well as coordinate future updates to the plan. 
(4)  Determine, prioritize, establish, conduct, construct and maintain a recreation and parks system for the city that meets the leisure needs of the citizens, including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, trails, indoor recreation centers, programs, activities, art and cultural activities, art and cultural facilities and the maintenance and repair of such facilities as required. 
(5)  Recommend the setting aside, leasing or acquisition of lands or buildings within the county limits for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, cultural facilities or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of these areas. 
(6)  Otherwise assist in the operation and enforcement of this chapter. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Section 14.2.3 - Use of Parks. 
The Roswell Recreation, Parks, Historic and Cultural Affairs Department shall schedule the use of all city parks, including Town Square and Heart of Roswell Park, for organized activities, programs, assemblages, gatherings or games. No individual or group shall erect any booth or stand or sell any article within the limits of any city park, including the Town Square, without the express written consent of the director of the recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or his authorized representative. Such consent may also be given by the mayor and council, provided the recreation, parks and historic and cultural affairs department is made aware of the proposed use and it does not conflict with other scheduled activities. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Section 14.2.4 - Activities Prohibited in Parks and Public Places. 
The following activities are prohibited in all City of Roswell public parks including the Roswell Trail System: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages . It shall be unlawful for any person to possess and/or consume any alcoholic beverage, or be under the influence of alcoholic, malt and/or vinous beverage, within any public park and/or within any building under the supervision of the Roswell Recreation, Parks, Historic and Cultural Affairs Department unless such usage is expressly permitted by signage or published rules of the particular park or recreation building. 
(2)  Weapons . It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any explosive substance (including fireworks) in any of the city parks, unless written permission for such has been authorized by the mayor and city council. It shall further be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within city parks unless expressly allowed by section 13.1.3 of the Roswell City Code. 
(3)  Injuring public property . It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, mutilate, deface, or in any indecent or loud acts of behavior, or in any other manner destroy or injure any public property, real or personal, belonging to, owned by, or leased or used by the city. 
(4)  Killing wildlife . It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, trap, shoot, maim or kill any animal or wildlife, or attempt to do any of the above to any animal or wildlife within any of the city parks without the written permission of the director of recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department of the city. 
(5)  Motor vehicles . It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate and/or park any motor vehicle, minibike or motorcycle within any city park, except in areas designated for such use. This section does not apply to city employees when municipal duties require them to drive over said park and/or to park their vehicles or equipment in order to perform city business. 
(6)  Noises . It shall be unlawful and in violation of subsection 8.8.3(s) of the Code of Ordinances of the city, as amended, for any person to make any unnecessary, loud noises, engage in noisy disputes or conversation, engage in any indecent or loud acts of behavior, or in any other manner disturb the public peace, quiet and order in any of the city parks. 
(7)  Park hours . All city parks shall be closed, and no person shall be authorized to be on the premises or property of any city park, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except authorized city employees or persons engaged in activities authorized by the Roswell Recreation, Parks, Historic and Cultural Affairs Department, or the mayor and city council. 
(8)  Permit required . It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity of the recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department which requires a permit and/or a ticket without first obtaining such permit and/or ticket. 
(9)  Polluting water in parks . It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or disturb any spring, branch, pond, fountain, or other water owned by or leased to the city. 
(10)  Posting signs . It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any bill, sign or notice on any tree, building or fixture in any of the parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any paper, books, refuse or trash of any kind in any of the public parks, except in containers provided for such. 
(11)  [Smoking.] It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use any tobacco product, e-cigarette, vape pen or any other "vapor products" as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-170 within any City of Roswell Park. 
(12)  Skateboards . It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard on any street, lane, way, road and/or any parking lot in any park in the city. However, this does not apply to any area which has been designated for such use during certain hours by the director of recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or his designated representative. 
(13)  Speed limit . It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle upon any road within a park in the city at a greater speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(14)  Swimming in lakes . It shall be unlawful for any person to swim in or enter any lake at any park in the city for the purpose of swimming or wading unless a permit for such has been issued by the director of recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or his authorized representative, or such person or persons are conducting recreation and parks department business. 
(15)  Swimming pool hours . The Roswell Area Park swimming pool and the Roswell Adult Aquatic Center shall be kept open during specified hours, notice of which shall be posted at some conspicuous place at all times while the pool is open for use. It shall be unlawful, except during open hours, for any person to enter the water of the pool or enter any enclosure provided for the purpose of keeping people away from the pool. This section does not apply to city employees when their duties require them to enter the pool and/or any enclosures. 
(16)  Urban camping . It shall be unlawful to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks, for living accommodations purposes or camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use or specifically authorized by permit. 
(17)  River parks and related areas . In addition to those regulations contained in subsections (a) through (p) of this section, the following regulations apply, unless exempted in writing by the director of the recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or his designee, to the Chattahoochee River Park, Willeo Park, Azalea Park, Riverside Park, Vickery Creek Park, Leita Thompson Memorial Park, Garrard Landing, and any other area which has been designated by the director of the recreation, parks, historic and cultural affairs department or his designated representative, with any discrepancies between subsections (a) through (p) and this subsection to be decided under this subsection: 
a.  Park closes one (1) hour after official sunset and opens one (1) hour before official sunrise. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use park or historic properties for purposes other than intended. 
c.  It shall be unlawful to use loudspeakers, bullhorns, public address systems and/or electronic amplifiers/devices without express written consent of the City of Roswell. 
d.  All litter and debris shall be collected and bagged and placed at designated locations. Littering and/or dumping is prohibited. 
e.  Horses and other equine are prohibited from the park. 
f.  Open fires, except inside cooking grills, are prohibited. 
g.  Pet owners shall remove any excrement left by their pets. 
(18)  Feeding fowl in park system or historic properties is prohibited . No person shall offer food to, provide any food for, or feed any fowl within the park system or historic sites at any time. Penalty: Any person violating or disobeying this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offense and may be immediately evicted from park property, may be issued a criminal trespass warning, and may be fined upon conviction, not less than $25.00 nor more than $250.00 for each provision violated, the fine recovered in manner and form as provided by the law. 
(19)  Detection devices in parks and historic properties . The use of metal detectors shall not be allowed in any city park or historic property unless authorized by the director of the recreation, parks, historic or cultural affairs department or his designated representative. Authorization must be obtained in the following manner: 
a.  Individuals may secure authorization by filling out a special search request form. This form requires a detailed description of the lost item(s). Failure to secure permission to use a metal detector could result in criminal trespass charges. 
b.  Discovery of items not contained in the search request form must be reported and/or turned in to the Roswell Recreation, Parks, Historic and Cultural Affairs Department's administrative office. 
c.  Failure to turn over these "other" discovered items could result in criminal theft charges. 
d.  Removal of items from park or historical properties could result in interference with government property charges. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Section 14.2.5 - Enforcement. 
City of Roswell Park Police shall have powers of arrest, concurrent with the powers of the Roswell Police Department for violations of any ordinance of the City of Roswell or state laws, and in addition shall have the power to eject any citizen or park participant from any park or public facility for violation of any rule or regulation of the Roswell Recreation, Parks, Historic and Cultural Affairs Department. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Section 14.2.6 - Violation, Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this section and/or concealing a violation of, or harboring, assisting or protecting a person charged with or convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00, by sentence of imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, and to community service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, either or both of such fines and imprisonment, or work on the streets, parks or public works, in the discretion of the municipal court judge. 
( 2016-09-16 , § 1(Exh. A), Amended 09/26/2016) 
Article 14.3 - Special Events[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-08-12, § 1, adopted August 13, 2012, repealed article 14.3, §§ 14.3.1—14.3.17. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, adopted February 24, 2014, amended repealed §§ 14.3.3 and 14.3.12. At the discretion of the editor, article 14.3, §§ 14.3.3 and 14.3.12, as they existed before repeal, have been reinstated, and amended as per Ord. No. 2014-02-03. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sections 14.3.1, 14.3.2 - Reserved. 
Section 14.3.3 - Zoning Requirements. 
Special event permits are available for events in the NX, CX, SH, CC, PV, OR, OP, IX and IL or historic properties overlay district. Permits for events in residentially zoned districts shall be issued on a limited basis for uses which will not create undue hardship on surrounding residences. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Sections 14.3.4—14.3.11 - Reserved. 
Section 14.3.12 - Other Permits Required. 
The applicant shall obtain other permits that may be required by other chapters of this Code or from other jurisdictions for this special event. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage. Any permit for the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages shall be in accordance with provisions of state law and chapter 3 of this Code. 
(b)  Fireworks. Any permit obtained regarding a fireworks display shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Roswell Fire Department. 
(c)  Signs . Permits for any signs advertising or relating to such special event shall be in accordance with the Unified Development Code (UDC) article 10.3 "Signs". 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Added, 2/24/2014) 
Sections 14.3.13—14.3.17 - Reserved. 
Chapter 15 - SPECIAL EVENTS, FILMING, & PUBLIC USE OF CITY FACILITIES 
Article 15.1 - Special Events 

Section 15.1.1 - Special Event Defined; Permit Required. 
Special event, as used in this article, means any activity which occurs upon private or public property: 
(a)  That will affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way or sidewalks; 
(b)  Disrupts the flow of traffic on public streets or sidewalks. 
No person or organization shall conduct a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the City of Roswell. Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.2 - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from the special event permit requirement: 
(a)  Funeral processions; 
(b)  Activities conducted by the City of Roswell acting within the scope of its authority; 
(c)  Activities involving a demonstration, march, assembly, or other exercise of rights guaranteed by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution which are regulated by section 18.4 of this Code unless the criteria in section 15.1.1 are met; 
(d)  Film productions which are regulated by section 15.2 of this Code; 
(e)  Use of city facilities which is regulated by section 15.3 of this Code; 
(f)  Temporary/seasonal businesses which are regulated by section 10.15 of this Code. 
(g)  Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.3 - Application: Deadline, Content, and Fee. 
(a)  A complete application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the community development department: 
(1)  Not less than two (2) weeks prior to an event if city resources are not required; 
(2)  Not less than thirty (30) days prior to a recurring event if city resources are required; 
(3)  Not less than sixty (60) days prior to a new event or recurring event with a change in venue/route if city resources are required; 
(4)  Not more than one (1) year prior to an event; or 
(5)  By the deadlines stated in section 15.1.9 for organizers requesting sponsorship of city resources. 
(b)  The following information shall be provided in the application: 
(1)  Name and purpose of the special event; 
(2)  Name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of applicant; 
(3)  Name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of event coordinator if applicant is an organization; 
(4)  Proposed date and times the event will be conducted; 
(5)  Proposed route to be traveled, the starting point and termination point, and any closures of streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-way requested (if applicable); 
(6)  Site plan with a map or diagram showing the area to be used, the location of any equipment, vendors, game booths, stands, stages, seating and other facilities, the areas to be used for parking, the location of toilet facilities and water as necessary for the event, any areas where alcohol will be served or sold including a description of the barriers to be used to enclose them; 
(7)  Projected number of persons and vehicles at the event; 
(8)  Schedule of activities within the event; 
(9)  Description of sound equipment to be used; 
(10)  Sanitation plan; 
(11)  A certification that the applicant will be financially responsible for any city fees or costs that may be imposed for an event; and 
(12)  Any other such information as any city department deems reasonably necessary to determine that the permit meets the requirements of this article. 
(c)  The complete application shall be submitted with a nonrefundable payment based on the fee structure established by the City of Roswell. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.4 - Standards for Denial of Permit. 
Reasons for denial of a special event permit include: 
(a)  An application has already been submitted for the same event on the same day at the same location; 
(b)  The event interferes or conflicts with previously scheduled special events, construction, maintenance, or other city activities; 
(c)  The event will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
(d)  The event will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
(e)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
(f)  The event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city; 
(g)  The application contains incomplete or false information; 
(h)  The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this article including failure to remit all fees and deposits or failure to provide proof of insurance, bonds, and a save harmless agreement to the city; 
(i)  There is a documented history of problems relating to the event in the past or the applicant, sponsor or promoter has not properly managed or paid all fees for prior events. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.5 - Administrative Review. 
The community development department shall send copies of special event applications to affected departments. Each department shall review the application and note the resources which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such activities, the length of time to perform such services, and the cost to perform such services. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.6 - Special Conditions on Permit. 
Each department reviewing an application may impose in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health, and welfare of the community. The conditions or restrictions of the departments shall become a part of the permit. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.7 - Permit Fees and Issuance. 
(a)  The community development department shall determine and calculate permit fees based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the applicant shall be responsible for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within thirty (30) days of the billing date shall be a violation of this chapter and shall subject the applicant and/or organization to late fees and other penalties up to and including denial of future permits. 
(b)  The initial permit fee must be paid in full prior to the issuance of a permit and no later than ten (10) business days prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  The fees required in this section shall be in addition to any other fees which may be required by any other ordinances or regulations that might be applicable. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the permit fees as stated in this section, the community development director or his or her designee shall issue the special event permit to the applicant. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.8 - Temporary Road Closure. 
Road closure(s) may be granted temporarily for permits issued pursuant to this article upon approval of the chief of police or his/her designee and the director of transportation or his/her designee. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.9 - Applications for Sponsorship of City Resources in Conjunction with a Special Event. 
(a)  All applications for sponsorship of city resources shall be submitted in conjunction with a special event permit application to the community development department. Sponsorship applications must be submitted by March 31 for events planned for July through December of the same year or by September 30 for events planned for January through June of the following year. In special circumstances, applications for sponsorship may be accepted after the deadline for first time applicants only. In special circumstances, as determined in the sole discretion of the mayor and city council, applications for sponsorship may be accepted after the deadline for first time applicants up to sixty (60) days prior to the event. 
(b)  The decision whether to grant sponsorship of city resources shall be based on how effectively the event satisfies the criteria listed below. An event held by an organization that is located in Roswell or which supports Roswell residents and/or businesses will be given priority. 
(1)  The event is open to the public and public participation is invited. 
(2)  The event will benefit Roswell residents. 
(3)  The event provides cultural and educational enrichment. 
(4)  The event promotes family values and is the type of activity or entertainment appropriate for families. 
(5)  The event will benefit Roswell's economy. 
(6)  The event will be marketed and advertised throughout North Fulton. 
(7)  The event will promote the image of the City of Roswell in a positive manner. 
(8)  The event is sponsored by a nonprofit organization and at least fifty (50) percent of all proceeds will go to a nonprofit organization. 
(c)  The mayor and city council shall approve or deny requests for sponsorship of city resources and if approved shall determine the cost, type and extent of city assistance to be provided to such event. The mayor and city council have the right to reject a request for sponsorship. 
(d)  A notice of decision regarding sponsorship of city resources shall be sent to the applicant at the physical or email address stated on the application. 
(e)  Applicant is responsible for any permit fees remaining after sponsorship has been applied to the total cost of the event. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.10 - Insurance Required. 
At the city's request, the applicant may be required to obtain and present evidence of a surety indemnity bond or comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. If the event poses higher risks than covered by such insurance, the applicant shall be responsible for assessing the risks of the event and obtaining additional insurance coverage. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.11 - Save Harmless Agreement. 
The applicant is required to provide a save harmless agreement in which the applicant agrees to defend, pay and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event; excepting any claims arising solely out of the negligent acts of the city, its officers and employees. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.12 - Limitations of Liability. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or its officials or employees any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which permit has been issued. The city and its officials and employees shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.13 - Sanitation and Clean-Up. 
A special event permit may be issued only after adequate waste disposal facilities have been identified and obtained by the applicant. The applicant will clean the right-of-way or public property of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-event condition, within twenty-four (24) hours of the conclusion of the event. If the applicant fails to clean up such refuse, such clean up shall be arranged by the city and the costs charged to the applicant. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.14 - Other Permits Required. 
The applicant shall obtain other permits that may be required by other chapters of this Code or from other jurisdictions for this special event. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage. Any permit for the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages shall be in accordance with provisions of state law and chapter 3 of this Code. 
(b)  Fireworks. Any permit obtained regarding a fireworks display shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Roswell Fire Department. 
(c)  Signs. Permits for any signs advertising or relating to such special event shall be in accordance with the Unified Development Code (UDC) Article 10.3 "Signs." 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.15 - Revocation of Special Event Permit. 
All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and do not vest any permanent rights. Special event permits may be revoked by the director of community development or his or her designee for the following reasons: 
(a)  Application contained incomplete or false information; 
(b)  Applicant does not comply with all terms and conditions of permit; 
(c)  Applicant fails to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; 
(d)  Disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency exists; 
(e)  Event threatens public safety, health, or welfare. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.16 - Appeal Procedure. 
Any applicant whose special event permit application has been denied or revoked may request a review of this decision by the city administrator. This request must be in writing and received by the city administrator within five (5) business days of the notice of permit denial or revocation. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city administrator to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of such appeal to the city clerk within five (5) business days of the notice of denial of the applicant's appeal by the city administrator. The mayor and council shall set a hearing date within fifteen (15) days of receiving such appeal request. At such a hearing, the applicant is entitled to be heard and present evidence in his behalf. The mayor and city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.17 - Special Event Permit at Event. 
The event organizer shall have a copy of the special event permit on-site during the entire event and shall furnish the permit at the request of any city official. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Section 15.1.18 - Penalty for Violation. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
(2012-08-12, § 1, Added, 08/13/2012) 
Article 15.2 - Commercial Film, Video and Photography in Public Areas 

Section 15.2.1 - Definitions; Permit Required. 
Media production shall mean all activity related to videotaping or filming for commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs, or commercials or professional photography with staff, model(s) and/or product(s), which involves set-up and tear down time of more than ten (10) minutes, requires reservation of a specific site on public property, requires city staff time to facilitate the shoot, or requires restriction of public sidewalks or roadway. 
Portrait photography shall mean all activity related to professional photography of a subject lasting less than two (2) hours which involves set-up and tear down time of less than ten (10) minutes. 
No person shall conduct a media production or portrait photography session for commercial use on public property without first having obtained the applicable permit from the City of Roswell. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.2 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any media production or portrait photography activity which occurs solely on private property with no impact to public property. 
B.  Current news productions, which includes reporter, photographers or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of a news event. 
C.  Productions which are conducted by students as part of a class project. 
D.  Productions which are conducted by the City of Roswell. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.3 - Application: Deadline, Content, and Fee. 
A.  Media production. 
a.  A complete application for a media production permit shall be submitted to the community development department not less than two (2) business days prior to the date production is to begin. 
b.  The following information shall be provided in the application for a media production permit: 
i.  Name, type and description of project; 
ii.  Name, address, and phone number of production company; 
iii.  Name, phone number, and email address of location manager; 
iv.  Location of project, including any building or landscaping changes; 
v.  Dates and times of shoot, including set up and tear down; 
vi.  Proposed road closure(s)(if applicable); 
vii.  Projected number of persons and vehicles; 
viii.  Special effects or stunts (if applicable); 
ix.  Any other such information as any city department deems reasonably necessary to determine that the production meets the requirements of this article. 
B.  Portrait photography. 
a.  A complete application for portrait photography may be submitted at any time during normal business hours prior to shooting, bearing in mind that reservations are required to shoot at city historic homes. 
b.  The following information shall be provided in the application for a portrait photography permit: 
i.  Name, address, phone number, and email address of photographer; 
ii.  Name, address, phone number, and email address of studio (if applicable); 
iii.  Primary photography location(s); 
iv.  Any other such information as any city department deems reasonably necessary to determine that the shoot meets the requirements of this article. 
C.  Complete media production and portrait photography permit applications shall be submitted with a nonrefundable payment based on the fee structure established by the City of Roswell. 
D.  Additional fees may be required based on the property used and the city staff required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.4 - Standards for Denial of Permit. 
Reasons for denial of a media production or portrait photography permit include: 
A.  The activity interferes or conflicts with previously scheduled media production, special events, construction, maintenance, or other city activities; 
B.  The activity will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical solution; 
C.  The activity will interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants; 
D.  The location of the activity will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents; 
E.  The activity will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the production would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city; 
F.  The application contains incomplete or false information; 
G.  The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this article including failure to remit all fees and deposits or failure to provide proof of insurance, bonds, and a save harmless agreement to the city. 
H.  There is a documented history of problems relating to the project in the past or the applicant, production company, or location manager has not properly managed or paid all fees for prior projects. 
I.  The activity violates federal, state, or local laws or established regulations for the property used. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.5 - Special Conditions on a Permit. 
The community development department shall send copies of media production permit applications to other affected departments. Each department reviewing an application may impose in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the production, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to ensure the safety, health, and welfare of the community. The conditions or restrictions of the departments shall become a part of the permit. 
No production activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects may be undertaken unless specifically approved by the Roswell Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.6 - Temporary Road Closure. 
Road closure(s) may be granted temporarily for media production permits issued pursuant to this article upon approval of the chief of police or his/her designee and the director of transportation or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.7 - Insurance Required. 
At the city's request, the applicant may be required to obtain and present evidence of a surety indemnity bond or comprehensive liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured. The insurance requirement is a minimum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) personal injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage against all claims arising from permits issued pursuant to this article. If the event poses higher risks than covered by such insurance, the applicant shall be responsible for assessing the risks of the event and obtaining additional insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.8 - Save Harmless Agreement. 
The applicant is required to provide a save harmless agreement in which the applicant agrees to defend, pay and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the production; excepting any claims arising solely out of the negligent acts of the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.9 - Limitations of Liability. 
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or its officials or employees any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which permit has been issued. The city and its officials and employees shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of the right-of-way or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.10 - Cleanup/Restoration. 
The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area and the cleanup of trash and debris. The areas used shall be cleaned of trash and debris immediately following the completion of the activity or within such other time established in the permit to city's satisfaction. Applicant shall be responsible for restoring an area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the city's satisfaction, such repairs and/or restoration shall be arranged by the city and the costs charged to the applicant. Removal, cutting or trimming of vegetation in the public right-of-way is prohibited unless specifically approved by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.11 - Revocation of Permit. 
All permits issued pursuant to this article shall be temporary and do not vest any permanent rights. Permits may be revoked by the director of community development or his or her designee for the following reasons: 
A.  Application contained incomplete or false information; 
B.  Applicant does not comply with all terms and conditions of permit; 
C.  Applicant fails to arrange for or adequately remit all fees, deposits, insurance or bonds to the city; 
D.  Disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency exists; 
E.  Shoot/production threatens public safety, health, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.12 - Appeal Procedure. 
Any applicant whose permit application has been denied or revoked may request a review of this decision by the city administrator. This request must be in writing and received by the city administrator within five (5) business days of the notice of permit denial or revocation. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city administrator to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of such appeal to the city clerk within five (5) business days of the notice of denial of the applicant's appeal by the city administrator. The mayor and council shall set a hearing date within fifteen (15) days of receiving such appeal request. At such a hearing, the applicant is entitled to be heard and present evidence in his behalf. The mayor and city council shall determine whether the denial or revocation of the permit is justified using the "any evidence" standard of review. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.13 - Permit to be On-Site. 
A copy of the permit shall be on-site for any activity governed by this article and permit holders shall furnish the permit at the request of any city official. No permit holder may make any public property exclusive for their use only unless specifically allowed by city staff. It should be anticipated that the public will be walking by and through major areas of public property, causing minor interruptions. Appropriate signage asking the public to not interfere with the shoot/production may be posted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.14 - City Logo. 
The City of Roswell logo may not be used without written permission from the community relations division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.15 - Fees. 
Mayor and council are hereby authorized to set fees, by resolution, for each permit herein described. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Section 15.2.16 - Penalty for Violation. 
In addition to or in lieu of revocation of a permit, violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof may be punishable as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01-01, Added, 1/13/2014) 
Chapter 18 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Article 18.1 - Management of Streets and Public Right-of-Way 

Section 18.1.1 - Street Repair and Construction. 
The City of Roswell Department of Transportation shall maintain and repair the streets and sidewalks under the jurisdiction of the city. This maintenance shall include removal of foliage, debris or any other obstruction that blocks clear vision or obstructs pedestrian traffic. 
State Law reference— Local home rule powers to provide for street construction repair and maintenance, Georgia Constitution art. IX, § II, par. III(a)(4). 
Section 18.1.2 - Permit Requirements for Construction in Right-of-Way. 
(a)  No person or company shall perform construction work in the street right-of-way without a permit issued by the city transportation department. Such permit shall be at the construction site at all times. Such construction must conform to the construction/maintenance guidelines and specifications of the City of Roswell and/or the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(b)  No person or company shall construct a drive or entrance to any public road without a permit from the city transportation department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any permanent feature such as an irrigation system, sign or fence in the street right-of-way without a permit from the city transportation department. 
Section 18.1.3 - Road Work Signage. 
Each person or company to whom a permit has been issued to perform construction work in the street right-of-way shall place appropriate traffic devices and signage as dictated by the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Section 18.1.4 - Repair after Excavation. 
When any part of any street, alley, or other property of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person or company performing such construction work shall promptly restore the street, sidewalk and landscaping to a condition as good as or better condition than before the construction commenced. 
Section 18.1.5 - Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act. 
No person, entity or contractor shall construct, establish, open, grade, alter or change in any manner, form or use any property within the public right-of-way, owned or maintained by any governmental agency, within the City of Roswell without complying with the Americans With Disabilities Act, as currently or hereafter amended. Any such work, which does not comply with said act shall be redone at the owner's expense, irrespective of whether such work has been approved by the city. All plans submitted to the city for review shall contain a certificate that said plans and requested permit fully comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended. The city will rely upon such certificate in issuing any permits or approving any plans. 
Section 18.1.6 - Street Dedication. 
The engineering division of the community development department, with review input by the transportation department, shall review, inspect and accept for dedication streets and sidewalks constructed in relation to the development of private lands or uses under the provisions of the city subdivision regulations or authority of a duly authorized development permit. All new streets accepted for dedication to the city shall have sidewalks or multi-modal paths constructed to current city design standards and specifications. 
Section 18.1.7 - Installation of Sidewalks 
Sidewalks shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  All owners, developers or occupiers of parcels of land where a development permit or building permit is issued shall be required to provide a sidewalk adjacent to any public street along the entire lot frontage. 
(b)  In cases where a development permit or building permit is sought on a tract of land proposed for single-family development requiring new public or private streets, the director of transportation shall require sidewalk installation along both sides of proposed public or private streets. Subsequently, the development permit shall indicate proposed construction of sidewalks along the entire road frontage on the designated sides of all proposed streets. The sidewalk shall be installed and the construction accepted by the director of transportation or his designee prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for any building or structure for any lot or project on the designated sidewalk side of the roadway. Such sidewalk shall conform to the AASHTO and ADA requirements. 
(c)  In the case of non-single-family development, sidewalks shall be required to be represented on design plans and development plans and installed in accordance with such plans along the total property frontage on public streets as required by the director of transportation. 
(d)  In the event of private roadways in non-single-family developments, sidewalks shall be installed as required by the design review board or for historic properties as required by the historic preservation commission and approved by the director of transportation. 
(e)  Where the director of transportation determines the topography of the road frontage is such that a special hardship exists on the property, he may authorize a payment to the City of Roswell in lieu of the required installation of the sidewalk. Criteria shall be established for all such approved hardships by the director of transportation to determine how the amount of payment will be calculated. Such criteria to determine the method of calculating such payment shall be approved by the mayor and city council and may be amended by the mayor and council thereafter upon recommendation of the director of transportation or the city administrator. 
(f)  Where trees exist or other conditions exist, the director of transportation may require the sidewalks to meander in the right-of-way or into the lot where the permit is being sought. The director of transportation may encourage all sidewalks to meander where conditions allow such to occur. 
(g)  The director of transportation shall require the sidewalk to be installed at least five (5) feet from the edge of the road pavement or the back of curb along the road unless the director determines a practical difficulty exists. Where the director has determined a practical difficulty exists, the sidewalk shall be installed no closer to the edge of the road or the back of the curb than two (2) feet unless authorized by the mayor and city council or the city administrator. 
This section shall not apply to any lot or parcel for which a development permit or building permit is issued but where the community development director determines that the permit is for an accessory use or structure to the principal use or structure or for minor repairs or additions to the principal building or structure in existence. Sidewalks are not required in established communities originally permitted without sidewalks unless required by the community development director. 
For any land or building development where sidewalks are required as outlined above and there is an existing sidewalk along the road or street frontage, an inspection of the sidewalk shall be made by the director of transportation or his agent. If the inspection shows the sidewalk is deficient or does not exist along the entire frontage, the owner must construct or repair the sidewalk to current design specifications including material revisions, such as concrete to brick, as required by the director of transportation. 
Along public roads where a city sidewalk project is being or has been awarded for construction, the director of transportation may accept payment in lieu of the actual installation of the required sidewalk where in his opinion the acceptance of funds would be appropriate. Any payment in lieu of the installation of the required sidewalk shall be in an amount determined by the director of transportation or his designee. The funds received shall be deposited in an account of the City of Roswell and restricted to use for the installation of sidewalks. 
The installation of the required sidewalk shall be completed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for the building or structure on the affected parcel. 
The property owner shall be required to maintain the sidewalk along the entire lot frontage by maintaining the grass or landscaping installed between the sidewalk and the edge or curb of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2008-09-12, § 1, 09/08/2008; 2001-06-02, Amended, 06/11/2001) 
Section 18.1.8 - Sidewalk upkeep. 
Owners of private streets and sidewalks that connect to the public street and sidewalk system shall maintain their streets and sidewalks to the same standards adhered to by the city transportation department in the maintenance and repair of public streets and sidewalks. 
Article 18.2 - Prohibitions 

Section 18.2.1 - Obstruction of Street or Right-of-Way. 
(a)  No person shall place or cause to place in any street and/or sidewalk: debris, rubbish, irrigation water, boxes, displays, signs, poles, goods, merchandise or any other object so as to impede and/or endanger traffic on streets and/or sidewalks unless permitted as required in section 18.1.2. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted to erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley, flat or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water on any sidewalk. 
(c)  No person or company shall construct or maintain a drive, yard or lot constructed of gravel, pebbles, or stone in such a manner that vehicles cause loose stones, pebbles or gravel to be thrown on to the adjacent street and/or sidewalk. 
(d)  All mailboxes constructed in the street right-of-way must conform to United States Postal Service standards and must not be constructed so as to be a fixed-object hazard to vehicles. 
(e)  Any personal property placed on the right-of-way following an eviction shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of physical eviction unless an extension of time is requested on behalf of the evicted tenant. For purposes of this ordinance such property is deemed abandoned property two (2) hours following eviction unless the landlord by contract specifies a shorter time. If the property is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may commence removal and cite the property owner. The penalty assessed shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost the city incurs in removing the property. 
(2012-09-14, § 1, Amended, 09/24/2012; 2000-06-01, Amended, 06/19/2000) 
Section 18.2.2 - Skateboard and Bicycle Regulations. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle or propel roller-skates, skateboards, or other similar devices upon a public street, highway or sidewalk in a manner which would constitute an unreasonable danger to the public or which would disrupt the public's ordinary and customary use of such street, highway or sidewalk. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle, or propel roller-skates, skateboards, or other similar devices on sidewalks which are properly designated for pedestrians only. The chief of police and department of transportation, after approval of mayor and council, are authorized to erect or have erected signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles or propelling of roller-skates, skateboards, or other similar devices. When such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the signs. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skating upon a sidewalk, that person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 1, section 1.1.3 of this Code. Provided, however, that any offender under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be treated as provided by state law as contained in the O.C.G.A. Title 15. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit that child or ward to violate any provision of this section. 
Article 18.3 - Numbering of Buildings 

Section 18.3.1 - Assignment of Address. 
All houses and buildings fronting the various streets and alleys in the city shall be numbered under the supervision of the engineering division of the community development department. 
Section 18.3.2 - Application for Building Number. 
Each owner of a house or building, or part thereof, shall apply to the city administrator for the proper number of the house or building, or part thereof. 
Section 18.3.3 - Maintenance of Address Log. 
The city administrator shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of every lot, house and building in the city. Such chart shall be open to inspection by anyone interested. 
Section 18.3.4 - Visibility of Building Number. 
It shall be the duty of the owner(s) of every house or building in the city to have placed thereon or in a place where the house or building can be specifically identified, the street number of the house or building. The street number shall be clearly visible from the street to pedestrians and vehicles going in either direction. 
Article 18.4 - Parades, Assemblies and Demonstrations 

Section 18.4.1 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the city administrator, who shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of the applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other use of public property and roads for private purposes. The administrator may delegate his authority or be assisted by other employees of the city as required. 
Assembly means a meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering for a common purpose that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or that occupies any public area in a place open to the general public. 
City means the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
Parade means any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow of traffic or that endangers or has the possibility of endangering the public's health, safety or welfare. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or group of any kind. 
Private organization or group of private persons means a group of three (3) or more persons, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Private purpose means any purpose not commanded or directed by law, statute, ordinance or regulation to be performed. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.2 - Permit Required. 
Every person and private organization or group of private persons wishing to use public property or public roads in the city for private purposes in holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing, or other activity is required to have a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in any such activity within the city, unless such permit is prohibited under state law or the activity is otherwise protected from this requirement by law, ordinance or other valid regulation. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.3 - Exceptions. 
This ordinance shall specifically not apply to funeral processions, neighborhood parades, provided activities remain solely within the boundaries of such neighborhood, school students going to or from classes or participating in properly supervised and sponsored activities and governmental entities acting within the scope of their functions and other activities as provided for by law or regulation. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.4 - Application. 
Every person and private organization or group of private persons required to procure a permit under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for the permit to the administrator, which application shall conform to the requirements of this article in addition to the following: 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided herein, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city and submitted to the administrator or his designee within a reasonable time prior to the planned activity for security purposes, verifications, and arrangements. A "reasonable time" shall in this instance be construed to mean a time of at least fifteen (15) but no more than sixty (60) days prior to the planned activity. The administrator shall act upon the application within ten (10) days of the receipt of a completed application. Applicant may make an emergency application to the mayor's office if an unforeseen circumstance arises that requires a response within twenty-four (24) hours. The mayor in his sole discretion shall determine if an emergency exists and, subject to this ordinance, grant such permit. 
(b)  Each application shall set forth the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the person or the home office address and telephone number of an applicant corporation, partnership, organization or group; 
2.  Date, time and place where the proposed activity is to be carried on, including proposed routes of passage; 
3.  Type, kind and class of activity to be carried on; 
4.  An approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will constitute such activity; 
5.  Names and addresses of partners of a partnership or officers and directors of a corporation; 
6.  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, signs or other attention getting devices proposed to be used; 
7.  Any additional information which the administrator may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(c)  Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner, if a partnership, or by an officer, if a corporation. 
(d)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article shall be kept in strict confidence by the city, to extent allowed by law, and shall be utilized only by the officials of the city responsible for administering these provisions. 
(e)  Any false statement in an application for a permit shall be grounds for revocation, denial and/or denial of future permit applications. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.5 - Administration. 
The city administrator of the City of Roswell, Georgia or his designee shall administer and enforce the provisions for application for and issuance of permits under this article. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.6 - Duties of Administrator. 
The administrator or designee shall have the following duties under this ordinance: 
(a)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for the application for a permit and for the submission of any required information needed to properly administer and enforce this article. 
(b)  To review the application for completeness and to collect a permit licensing fee in the amount to be set by mayor and council which shall be equal to the administrative costs of processing the permit plus the costs for the use of city services or property unless the activity is conducted for the sole purpose of public issue speech protected under the First Amendment for which no costs shall be assessed for police protection. 
(c)  To designate or coordinate sites and set time schedules; to coordinate with county authorities, and, where appropriate, to receive the approval of the state department of transportation, Fulton County Sheriff or other necessary public officer. 
(d)  To issue a permit within ten (10) days of receipt of an acceptable and complete application provided, however, that the administrator may defer the issuance of a permit until approved by mayor and council, if appropriate. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.7 - Procedure for Issuance. 
(a)  If any provision of this ordinance provides for the review of an application for a permit by a city officer designated therein, the administrator or his designee shall forward a copy of the application to that officer for recommendation. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer, the administrator shall take action upon the application, although he may refer the same to the mayor and council for consideration at the next regular meeting. 
(c)  Unless some significant interference with the rights of non-participants exist, or the flow of traffic would unreasonably be obstructed, or the public safety be endangered, or another unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order, and convenience of the general public would occur, the permit shall be granted. 
As a condition to issuing a permit, the administrator or his designee may require the provision of personnel for trash clean-up of affected areas littered during the activity, the provision of first-aid and medical resources if considered necessary, proof of storage areas for motor vehicles occasioned by the permitted activity, the provision of temporary toilet facilities and other items considered necessary based on experience with such activities and coordination with other city, county and state officials. The administrator shall not require personnel for normal governmental functions such as traffic control and police protection. Failure to comply with additional necessary requirements of the administrator is grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by the private organization or group of private persons and is grounds for a claim for reimbursement of funds expended by the city for such extraordinary expenses agreed, but not provided by the applicant. 
(d)  The administrator shall issue a signed permit to an applicant therefore, which permit shall be dated and state the nature and time of the activity authorized. 
(e)  Any applicant whose application under this ordinance is denied by the administrator may appeal such denial to the mayor and City Council of Roswell, which shall consider such appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the appeal, if such appeal is filed by the day items are to be placed on the agenda in accordance with the normal procedures of mayor and council of the City of Roswell. In the event an applicant fails to appeal before the agenda is prepared, he may nevertheless be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of mayor and council if he has provided each councilmember and the mayor a copy of the application which he submitted to the administrator and the reasons for denial not less than two (2) business days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and council following denial of the application. No appeal shall be heard after thirty (30) days subsequent to denial of the application. 
Upon appeal, the mayor and council shall determine the cause for denial and unless possible significant interference with the rights of non-participating citizens; an unreasonable obstruction of the orderly flow of traffic; a clear and present endangerment of Roswell citizens or another possible specific unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order or convenience of the general public is shown, the permit shall be issued. 
(f)  In no event shall any private organization or group of private persons be permitted to bring signs, banners, posters, leaflets, handbills or any other printed material of any size or shape containing any message intended to influence any judge, juror, witness, or court officer, in the discharge of his duty at the City of Roswell City Hall, the City of Roswell Municipal Court, or the grounds upon which they stand. No private organization or group of private persons, unless contracted through the city's recreation and parks department, may use the City of Roswell City Hall grounds for private purposes in holding a parade, assembly, demonstration, or other activity on any non-holiday weekday, prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on any Saturday or public holiday, or prior to 1:00 p.m. nor after 5:00 p.m. on any Sunday. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.8 - Violations and Penalties. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the City of Roswell and may be punished as provided under section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any person, being an officer or employee of the City of Roswell, Georgia, who shall violate any provision of this ordinance may be discharged from public service or employment or may be subjected to such other disciplinary action as may be appropriate. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.9 - Subsequent Amendment. 
This ordinance shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the City of Roswell to assess, levy and collect any permit fees. The payment of any permit fee herein provided shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment, levy or collection of additional fees upon the same persons, firm or corporation herein described. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Section 18.4.10 - Financial Responsibility. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall relieve any person or persons or organization from responsibility for any injuries or damages to persons or property, private or public, occasioned by any act or omission arising from the activity for which any permit under this ordinance was issued. 
(2001-11-08, Added, 11/19/2001) 
Chapter 19 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Article 19.1 - General 

Section 19.1.1 - Short Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Roswell." 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.2 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.3 - Purpose and Intent. 
The intents and purposes of this chapter are stated below: 
(a)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(b)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(c)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land improvements; 
(d)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
(e)  To assure that land is developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Roswell. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.4 - Jurisdiction and Enforcement. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land within the city as now or hereafter established. 
(b)  Enforcement. After the effective date of this chapter, no person shall subdivide land except in accordance with this chapter within the city, or commence construction of any public improvements on such subdivided land, prior to the approval of the preliminary plat of such land in accordance with the provisions hereof. No real property within the city shall be divided and offered for sale until a final plat thereof is approved by the mayor and city council, and recorded in accordance with the provisions in this section. 
The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city through its attorney or other official designated by the mayor and council may enjoin such transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
Building permits shall not be issued for structures located in a subdivision created subsequent to the adoption of this chapter unless a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded as provided pursuant to this chapter. 
Whenever any person shall construct a road or street or alley to be used by the public generally, he shall first comply with all provisions of this chapter pertaining to the development of roads and streets and alleys, and shall construct same in accordance with the standards fixed by this chapter. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.5 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
City: The City of Roswell. 
Comprehensive plan: A set of documents approved by the city council which sets forth desired long range development patterns for the City of Roswell. 
Health department: The Fulton County Health and Wellness Department as the enforcing agent of the Georgia Department of Public Health. 
Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat of record or survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this article, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Planning commission: The City of Roswell Planning Commission. 
Plat: A map indicating the subdivision or re-subdivision of land, intended to be filed for recording. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purpose of this chapter "streets" are divided into the following categories: (See Illustration 1.) 
(1)  Major arterials: Those streets designated as such on the adopted Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Roswell. 
(2)  Collector street: A street used to carry traffic from the "minor streets" to the major arterial street and includes the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
(3)  Minor streets: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Alley: A minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 

Illustration 1. Subdivision Street Types 
(5)  Cul-de-sac: A street having one (1) end open to traffic and being permanently terminated within the plat by a vehicular turnaround. 
(6)  Marginal access street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to major arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
Subdivider: The person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, except for the R-TH (Fee Simple Townhouse) District, the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved, provided a development permit and grading permit is issued to authorize construction and to ensure compliance with the applicable codes and regulations. 
(2)  The division of land into five (5) or fewer lots, provided: 
(i)  Each lot abuts an existing public street. 
(ii)  No substantial alteration of existing utility installations is involved. 
(iii)  That the zoning administrator is notified of such division of land through a plat and executes a formal release of the property from the platting process for recording and development purposes, provided all applicable permits are obtained. 
(iv)  A development and grading permit is issued to authorize construction and to ensure compliance with applicable codes and regulations. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.6 - Conflicts. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the most restrictive standard shall govern. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.1.7 - Violation and Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 420; Code Ann. Section 60-1214-21). Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Article 19.2 - Requirements for Development Approval 

Section 19.2.1 - Outline of Procedure for the Subdivider. 
(a)  Provided the land is suitably zoned for the intended use the subdivider may submit a preliminary plat in accordance with sections 19.4.1 and 19.4.2 to the community development department for submittal to the planning commission. 
Any requested variances from the development standards shall comply with section 19.2.9. 
(b)  Following approval of the preliminary plat the subdivider may submit six (6) copies of the proposed plans and two (2) copies of any required study, i.e. traffic, hydrology, etc., to the community development department for the applicable permits. Plans shall be in accordance with section 19.4.4, provided, however, if a proposed project is for a non-single-family residential development the applicable sections of article 11.2 of the Unified Development Code (UDC), must be complied with. 
(c)  Upon substantial completion of the improvements provided in the approved plans, and any revisions to those plans, the subdivider may submit a final plat to the community development department in accordance with sections 19.4.5 and 19.4.6. 
(d)  Combinations and re-plats. Where separate lots or parcels of land are proposed to be combined or re-platted, they shall be reviewed by the planning commission, and if found to result in the same number or fewer lots or parcels, they shall require final approval by the planning commission. If however, upon review the planning commission finds that such combination or re-platting does result in a greater number of lots or parcels, such combination or re-platting must be subjected to the requirements of these regulations and receive conditional approval by the planning commission, and final plat approval by the mayor and city council before recording such plats. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.2 - Suitability of Land. 
Land subject to the flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use, shall not be platted for residential use nor any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or proper construction, unless hazards can be and are corrected. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.3 - Name of Subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.4 - Access. 
Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public or private street in accordance with the following: 
1.  The proposed street shall meet the City of Roswell standards and regulations as provided in the standard construction specifications, as amended from time to time and a copy of which shall be made available by the city engineer. 
2.  In residential subdivisions, the private roads and stormwater management facilities associated therewith shall be maintained by a mandatory homeowners association, unless said facilities are dedicated to and accepted by the City of Roswell, and documents of incorporation shall be submitted to the community development department prior to the recording of the final plat. 
3.  The subdivider shall provide all necessary easements for ingress and egress for police, fire, emergency vehicles and all operating utilities. 
4.  The final plat of any subdivision that contains private streets shall clearly state that such streets are private streets. 
When land is subdivided, created parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land without current street access. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.5 - Conformance to Adopted Major Thoroughfare and Other Plans. 
All streets and other features of the adopted major thoroughfare plan of the City of Roswell, Georgia shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the mayor and council of the City of Roswell. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the Georgia State Highway Department may be required by the planning commission. 
When features of other plans adopted by the City of Roswell (such as schools or other public building sites, parks or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall either be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a six-month period from the date of preliminary plat submittal by the appropriate public agency. 
All land to be subdivided shall have suitable areas set aside for recreation or other public uses to serve the total needs of the development. 
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the City of Roswell Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.6 - Large Scale Developments. 
The requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a large scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project or shopping center, which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks and streets, if the development is recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city, and if it is in conformity with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.7 - General Requirements for Streets, Easements and Other Public Lands. 
(a)  All construction shall conform to the City of Roswell Standard Construction Specifications, as amended. 
(b)  Street names shall conform to the City of Roswell Street Name Regulations. 
(c)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major arterial street or a limited access highway, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planted. Lots shall have no access to major streets (or limited access highways) but only to access streets. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.8 - Gated Communities. 
Gates installed in subdivisions with more than one (1) lot shall comply with the following: 
1.  Plan approval and permit shall be obtained prior to installing any gates. Gates shall not prohibit public access to any areas dedicated to public use. 
2.  No gate shall be installed within the dedicated right-of-way. 
3.  The gate shall provide for stacking distance, turnaround and emergency vehicle access as required by the City of Roswell. 
4.  Gate permits may be denied based on traffic conditions, interconnectivity needs and when not in compliance with design guidelines. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.2.9 - Variances. 
When the mayor and council, with a recommendation from the planning commission, find that because of topographic or other conditions peculiar to the site, the literal enforcement of a provision of this chapter may result, in an individual case, in unnecessary hardship to the subdivider, they may vary the regulations where such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. Any variance shall be recorded in the minutes of the mayor and city council together with the reasons used to justify it. 
In any case in which any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter or amendment thereto adopted by city council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate within the district in which such land is situated, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, or abate unlawful use. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Article 19.3 - Design Standards 

Section 19.3.1 - Design of Utilities and Other Improvements. 
(1)  All utility systems, including water, sewerage, gas and electric, along with component parts, structures, appendages and materials, shall be designed to City of Roswell, Fulton County or other applicable standards and be approved by the city engineer. All utility systems shall be installed underground. Above-ground utility systems will not be permitted, except where certain appurtenances and accessories must be installed above-ground for servicing. 
(2)  All subdivisions shall meet the stormwater requirements of the City of Roswell. When serving more than three (3) lots, detention ponds, retention ponds and water quality features (including all required access easements, landscape strips and fences) shall be located on an individual lot of record where no home can be constructed. This parcel shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners' association or the lots of record being served by this facility. The parcel shall have a minimum twenty-foot wide continuous access to a public or private road in a manner that allows access and maintenance of this parcel. This lot will not be required to meet the normal lot standards for that Unified Development Code (UDC) district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended, 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Article 19.4 - Platting 

Section 19.4.1 - Preliminary Plat Specifications. 
(a)  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
(b)  Sheet size. Sheet size shall be a maximum of thirty (30) by forty-two (42) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(c)  Topography. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations at five (5) feet contour intervals based on sea level datum (or a datum plane approved by the city engineer) and a tie to one (1) or more bench marks approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
(2)  Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage. 
(3)  North arrow and graphic scale and date. 
(4)  Vicinity map showing location of the subdivision. 
(5)  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances. 
(6)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
(7)  Existing streets, utilities and easements on or adjacent to the tract. 
(8)  Other physical features such as streams, lakes, swampy areas, and existing building. 
(9)  Proposed layout including streets, alleys, street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings and square footage of each lot. 
(10)  Block numbers and lot numbers. Minimum lot size and minimum lot width at building line noted. 
(11)  Provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, and storm drainage. 
(12)  Minimum building front, side and rear yard setback lines. 
(13)  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted. 
(14)  Location and results of percolation tests for lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system, as required by the health department. 
(15)  Current Unified Development Code (UDC) classification and conditions (when applicable). 
(16)  Proposed street pavement and right-of-way width, cul-de-sac pavement and right-of-way radius, intersection pavement and right-of-way radius, all centerline curve data and tangent data shall be provided. 
(17)  Clearly identify existing and proposed right-of-way and existing and proposed roadway conditions along the entire road frontage. 
(18)  Interior and exterior sidewalks. 
(19)  Identify all specimen trees, including specimen trees on adjoining properties where encroachment into the critical root zone is proposed. Indicate which, if any, specimen trees are proposed to be removed. 
(20)  Street tree plan and demonstrate compliance with tree density requirements as established in article 10.2 of the Unified Development Code (UDC). 
(21)  Sight distance calculations. 
(22)  Tie four (4) corners of the property to a minimum of two (2) GPS points. 
(23)  The following note: 
DRAINAGE 
The owner of record, on behalf of himself/herself/itself and all successors in interest, specifically releases the City of Roswell from any and all liability and responsibility for flooding or erosion from storm drains or from high water of natural creeks, rivers or drainage features. Drainage easements are hereby established for the sole Preliminary Subdivision Plat Specifications purpose of providing for the emergency protection of the free flow of surface or stormwaters along all watercourses as established by any final plat. The City of Roswell may conduct emergency maintenance operations within these easements, where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall include the removal of trees and other debris, excavation, filling, and the like, necessary to remedy a condition, which in the judgment of the City of Roswell is potentially injurious to the health, life, public property, public roads, or utility systems. Such emergency maintenance, conducted for the common good, shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the City of Roswell. The City reserves the right to seek reimbursement for expenses from the owner(s) of the property(ies) of the land that generated the conditions requiring emergency service. 
Note: No structure shall be located within forty (40) feet of an open drain. 
(24)  Location of floodplain and flood way, if applicable. 
(25)  Location of all stream buffers and setbacks, if applicable. 
(26)  Location of all wetlands, if applicable. 
(27)  Land lot lines or municipal boundaries accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.2 - Submittal and Approval of the Preliminary Plat. 
(a)  At least forty-five (45) days prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered, fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat and required supplemental material shall be submitted to the zoning administrator with a written request for approval. 
(b)  Copies of the preliminary plat shall be distributed to the Fulton County Health Department for review and recommendation prior to approval by the planning commission. 
(c)  Within ninety (90) days after submission of the completed preliminary plat application, the planning commission shall review it and, based on recommendations of the staff and the Fulton County Department of Health, give its approval, disapproval or approval subject to listed modifications as a basis for preparation of the final plat. 
(d)  The action of the planning commission shall be noted on the preliminary plat. Copies of the plat with its disposition noted thereon shall be returned to the subdivider, to the Fulton County Health Department, and to the city engineer. One (1) copy shall be filed in the zoning administrator's office. 
(e)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather it shall be approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat to be used as a guide for the preparation of the final plat. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq. establish procedures for the approval of plats of subdivisions near a part of the state highway system. 
Section 19.4.3 - Submittal of Plans for Utilities and Streets. 
Upon approval of the preliminary plat, plans and specifications for the improvements required under the provisions of this chapter shall be submitted, provided, however, if a proposed project is for a non-single-family residential development, or any subdivision within the historic district (including single-family residential) the applicable sections of article 13, Unified Development Code (UDC) must be complied with. 
Final engineering plans shall be submitted and approved prior to any land-disturbing activities or alterations on the site. Said plans shall be in conformance with all design standards and regulations adopted by the City of Roswell and shall include all engineering documentation as may be required by the City of Roswell including, but not limited to grading and utility plans, erosion and sediment control plans, stormwater management plans and the method of continuing maintenance of these facilities, if required. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.4 - Approval of the Plans and Specifications. 
Upon submission of the plans and specifications, the city engineer shall give within forty-five (45) days his approval or disapproval and indicate on the plan his action. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.5 - Final Plat Specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the approved preliminary plat with the following additions: 
(a)  The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum sheets of a size to be approved by the city engineer. Where more than one (1) sheet is required an index map shall be included on the same size sheet. 
(b)  Accurate reference to the land lot system of Fulton County and when any part of the subdivision is within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of one (1) or more of the established geographic positions of the Plane Coordinate System of Georgia, the bearings or azimuths of the plane coordinate system shall be extended to and used in the subdivision and the coordinates, based on the Plane Coordinate System of Georgia, shall be shown at least on four (4) principal corners of said subdivision. 
(c)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth-foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) to five thousand (5,000). 
(d)  Name of subdivision, exact location, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the subdivision. Street numbers will be assigned to each lot in accordance with city requirements. 
(e)  Central angles, radii, lengths of tangents, and arc distances of all curves. 
(f)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth-foot along with the bearings for said lines. 
(g)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(h)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of easements and areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(i)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
(j)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document of private covenants if any. 
(k)  A note indicating that water and sanitary sewer lines are dedicated to the appropriate governing agency as required. 
(l)  The following certifications: 
(1)  The engineers or surveyors certificate of accuracy signed by the engineer or surveyor. 
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR/ENGINEER 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future", and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Roswell" and the requirements of the Unified Development Code (UDC) of the City of Roswell, Georgia" have been fully complied with. 
By:  Registered Civil Engineer No. 
By:  Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. 
(2)  Owners certification of ownership, intention to subdivide, and dedication to public use streets, alleys, easements and other public areas, signed by the owner. 
CERTIFICATE OF OWNER 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, parks, drains, easements and public grounds thereon shown, which comprise a total of acres, for the purposes therein expressed. 
Subdivider:  Owner: 
Date:  Date: 
(3)  Governing authority's acceptance of streets, alleys, easements and other public uses, as authorized by the mayor and council. 
FINAL APPROVAL 
_____ Mayor, City of Roswell       Date    
_____ Engineer, City of Roswell       Date    
The natural drains, branches, culverts and drainage structures shown on this plat are necessary for drainage of the subdivision and the City of Roswell will not be held responsible for overflow or erosion caused by them or for extension of culverts shown. Pursuant to the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Roswell," this plat was given final approval by the City of Roswell. 
(4)  Certification by the Fulton County Health Department that the plat and proposed water and sewerage facilities are acceptable. 
(5)  The mayor and city council's and city engineer's approval of the final plat, signed by the mayor and the city engineer. 
(6)  Flood certification note: 
FLOOD HAZARD NOTE:  Portions of this property do/do not lie within a 100-year flood hazard zone as defined by the F.E.M.A. Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Roswell, Georgia, Community Panel Number    , dated     
NOTE: Disturbance of the 100-year floodplain is prohibited. 
(7)  Note: Detention and/or water quality features that service this subdivision are maintained by the homeowners association and subject to the stormwater facilities BMP covenant on file with Fulton County and the City of Roswell. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.6 - Final Plat Approval. 
(a)  Application for final plat approval. After the preliminary plat and the plans and specifications of a proposed land subdivision have been given approval by the planning commission and the City of Roswell, the subdivider may, within two (2) years from approval, submit to the mayor and city council: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the mayor and city council on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) copies of the final plat and other documents as specified in section 19.4.5, the original and at least one (1) copy of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum. 
(3)  Upon completion of the improvements required by these rules and regulations, the subdivider shall present to the city engineer one (1) complete set of the construction plans and drawings showing the subdivision and its improvements. This set of plans and drawings shall include: 
(A)  "As built" plans of all streets and alleys showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines. 
(B)  "As built" centerline profile of all streets where final grades vary from the approved plans. 
(C)  Profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines as such improvements shall have actually been installed by the subdivider. 
(D)  A letter submitted by a registered professional engineer and/or registered surveyor certifying that all sewers, storm drains, curbing and paving, have been placed according to grade stakes set by him or his representatives to conform to construction plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(E)  "As built" drawings and certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater management system has been constructed in conformance with the construction plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
However, no approval shall be given in connection with said final plat, or unit division thereof, until improvements are substantially completed, and the city engineer certifies that all required utilities installations have been paid for by the subdivider and that the subdivider has complied with one (1) of the following alternatives: 
(a)  All utilities and other improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  A subdivider's performance bond, in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost of the infrastructure improvements not yet in compliance, shall have been filed by the subdivider in the office of the zoning administrator, said performance bond shall: 
(1)  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all incomplete work required to complete all improvements and installations for the subdivision, or unit division thereof, in compliance with these rules and regulations within a specified time. 
(2)  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of the City of Roswell. 
(3)  Be in an amount as set by the City of Roswell, sufficient to pay for all required improvements. 
(4)  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Be approved by the zoning administrator or the city attorney. 
Additionally, the developer shall be required to provide a maintenance bond with the city and shall agree to maintain the streets rights-of-way for a period of one (1) year from acceptance of the streets by the city. The bond will be in the amount of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the estimated infrastructure construction cost, which may include but not be limited to paving, curbing, drainage and water lines with a minimum bond amount of $5,000.00. 
At the end of the one-year maintenance bond, the city engineer shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and bonding company of any corrections to be made. 
No building permit is to be issued until approval of the final plat by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Procedure for approval of final plat. The Roswell Mayor and City Council shall check the final plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat and with the provisions of this chapter, and shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of time and place of which shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing. A notation of the mayor and city council's action shall be made on the original tracing and two (2) prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefor if the final plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat is not taken by the mayor and city council within forty-five (45) days of the date of the submittal of a completed application, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.7 - Recording of Final Plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat, the community development department shall have the final plat recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County, and the original filed with the community development department, unless the original is requested by the professional of record who shall provide an exact reproducible copy of said final plat along with an affidavit stating that such is an exact replica. The subdivider shall be responsible for furnishing two (2) plastic vellum copies of the final plat to be recorded and shall pay the recording fee. The Clerk of the Superior Court shall indicate on all copies of the final plat, the book and page number in the Fulton County records where the final plat is recorded. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.4.8 - Fees. 
A fee shall be paid to the City of Roswell at the time of filing an application for preliminary plat approvals and other permits as necessary for the development and final platting of the subdivision. All applicable fees shall be in accordance with the fee structure adopted by the City of Roswell and maintained in the community development department. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Article 19.5 - Required Improvements 

Section 19.5.1 - Required Improvements Generally. 
Every subdivider shall be required to have installed all improvements and utilities, as indicated on the approved plans and specifications before lots can be sold, except as provided in section 19.2.1. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Section 19.5.2 - Compliance and Completion of Improvements. 
(a)  Letter of approval. Signature by the city engineer on the final plat shall indicate substantial completion and approval of the required provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Inspection. All underground installations, subgrades, bases or courses of asphalt shall not be covered or hidden before they are inspected and accepted by the city engineer or his agent. 
(c)  Certification. All improvements required under the provisions of this ordinance shall be installed by a person, firm or corporation competent, qualified, licensed and bonded to do such work. 
(d)  Markings. All lot and block corners or changes in direction shall be marked by either a metal or concrete monument approved by the city engineer. 
(2003-12-30, Amended, 12/08/2003) 
Chapter 21 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND CABLE SERVICES 
Article 21.1 - Franchises for Fiber Optic Communication Services 

Section 21.1.1 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the grantee; (ii) each person in which the grantee has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the grantee; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the grantee; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the grantee solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the grantee. 
Anniversary date means the date on which a franchise agreement is fully executed. 
City means the City of Roswell. 
Compensation year means each calendar year during the term of a franchise agreement in which compensation is paid to the city. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the grantee or the telecommunications system. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than twenty (20) percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one (1) person or group of persons. 
Customer means any person who uses the services of the grantee in the corporate limits of the city. 
Equipment means the poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used to provide services. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor agency. 
Fiber optic communications or fiber optic services means telecommunication systems as defined in "system" or "telecommunication system" found in this section. 
Franchise means the nonexclusive authorization granted as provided in this article to occupy or use the streets and/or public rights-of-way within the City of Roswell for the construction, operation and maintenance of a fiber optic telecommunications system within all or a portion of the City of Roswell. 
Franchise agreement means a fully executed and notarized contractual agreement by and between the city and grantee, wherein grantee accepts the provisions stated in this article. 
Grantee means any company providing access or local telecommunications service using facilities either constructed, owned or leased for the purpose of providing voice, data or video telecommunication service. 
Gross revenue means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, that is received, directly or indirectly, by the grantee, from or in connection with, the provision of services over the telecommunications system that originate or terminate within the corporate limits of the city. Revenue derived from private line services provided by the grantee shall be prorated by dividing the portion of the private line located in the streets and public rights-of-way by the total mileage of the private line. Gross revenue shall not include the wholesale revenue of the grantee to the extent that the person providing such wholesale revenue to the grantee pays to the city, pursuant to an agreement with the city, an annual franchise fee, or an amount equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such person's gross revenue (as defined in this agreement) from the provision of services in the city. By way of example, but without limitation "gross revenue" includes installation charges, access charges paid to the grantee by other carriers, and the lease or resale of lines or circuit paths to third parties. "Gross revenue" does not include revenue uncollectible from customers or revenue from long distance services. 
PSC means the Georgia Public Service Commission or any success or agency. 
Private line means point-to-point service linking communications carriers with their own facilities and/or facilities of other communications carriers. Private lines shall also include point-to-point non-switched, dedicated service linking non-communications businesses. For the purposes of this agreement, private lines shall include, but not be limited to, virtual private lines, or other means of offering point-to-point, non-switched service connections. 
Public right-of-way means real property subsurface and air rights acquired by the city by any lawful means and includes the surface and that area below the surface which is necessary to support the public street, alley, path, bridge, tunnel, sidewalk, planting strip, median, waterway, dock, wharf, pier, public ground or other public right-of-way. Public right-of-way also includes the surface of any public street, alley, path, bridge, tunnel, sidewalk, planting strip, median, waterway, dock, wharf, pier, public ground or other public right-of-way acquired by the city. No reference herein or in any franchise for use of any public right-of-way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city that its title to any public right-of-way or any improvement or object located therein is sufficient to permit or authorize its use by the grantee. 
Services means any telephone service, interconnection service, access service and other telecommunications services provided by the grantee in connection with the telecommunications system, except for "cable service," as that term is defined at 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
System or telecommunications system means grantee's network of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing audio, video or other forms of electronic signals to or from subscribers or locations within the city, but not including the offering to the public cable television services as defined under the Cable Communications Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and/or any franchise granted by the city pursuant to said act. 
Section 21.1.2 - Authority to Grant Franchise. 
The city warrants that it has the right to issue a non-exclusive, revocable franchise to a grantee to have, acquire, construct, expand, reconstruct, maintain, use and operate in, along, across, on, over, through, above and under the public streets, alleys and rights-of-way of the city, a fiber optics telecommunications system (the "system"). In the event the federal or state government acquires or assumes exclusive jurisdiction over the issuance or regulation of fiber optic telecommunications franchises, grantee agrees to comply with city rules, regulations, and restrictions respecting use of its right-of-way including any such provisions contained in a franchise agreement. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7) grants to municipalities the power to grant franchises to public utilities. 
Section 21.1.3 - Application for Franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise application shall be accompanied by a processing fee in the amount of $1,000.00. In addition to the processing fee, each applicant shall be responsible for reasonable direct costs incurred by the city in overseeing the use of its right-of-way. Such fee and associated costs are in addition to fees associated with any licenses or permits required to be furnished by federal, state, or local law. The costs for which grantee may be responsible include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Legal fees for negotiation of franchise; 
(2)  Coordination of construction schedules; 
(3)  Engineering review; 
(4)  Establishment and enforcement of building codes; 
(5)  Consultants' fees; 
(6)  Mapping of existing utilities in the rights-of-way to prevent interference between them; and 
(7)  Coordination of proposed routing with other applicants. 
A portion of such costs may be prorated where applicants use "joint build agreements" or otherwise cooperate in ways that significantly lessen the city's administrative oversight costs. The processing fee and responsibility for costs shall apply to each new project undertaken by the grantee. 
(b)  Each such application shall be kept on file with the department of transportation. Any intentional misrepresentation in such application shall be grounds for the rejection of the franchise. The application shall be a part of any franchise grant or agreement under this chapter. 
(c)  Each application shall include a survey, map and description of the proposed service area for the grantee. 
(d)  No franchise shall be approved by the council until the adequacy and feasibility of the grantee's construction arrangements, insurance and bonding have been reviewed and approved either by the full council or the community development and transportation committee. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 21.1.4 - Franchise—Grant; Conditions; Terms. 
(a)  All franchises, and all renewals, extensions and amendments thereof shall be approved by mayor and council. No franchise shall be granted before the application therefor has been fully processed and approved by mayor and council. 
(b)  Grantee shall not provide cable services or operate a cable system as defined in the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C.A. § 521, et seq., as amended) or as recognized by the Federal Communications Commission (the FCC) without first obtaining a separate cable franchise from the city and shall not allow the use of the system by a cable system that has not been granted a franchise to operate a cable communications system by the city. Nor shall any provider of cable services or grantee of a cable television franchise operate or provide a telecommunications service or facilities except pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(c)  Regulatory Approvals. The grantee shall obtain all necessary approvals from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities to offer services through the equipment, and shall, upon the city's request, submit evidence of such approvals to the city. Grantee shall not provide services directly regulated by the Georgia Public Services Commission (the PSC) under the laws of Georgia unless duly authorized by the PSC. 
(d)  Franchises shall be evidenced by a contract adopted by the city council, which contract shall be submitted to the mayor in the manner provided for in the Charter of the city presently in effect or hereafter adopted. Such contract shall specify the term of the franchise and may include provisions for renewal and renegotiation. 
Section 21.1.5 - Construction. 
(a)  Licenses and permits. The grantee shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses, or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain or repair the system, and to construct, maintain and repair any part thereof prior to commencement of any such activity. Issuance of a permit by any agency of the city as to the construction and installation of any portion of grantee's system does not waive other applicable requirements of federal or Georgia law, and grantee shall comply with such other requirements. 
(b)  Subject to police power. The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use, maintenance and operation of the system shall be subject to all lawful police regulations of the city and performed in accordance with all laws and regulations of the city for utility location and excavation in public rights-of-way presently in effect or hereafter adopted. In addition to the duty under any other law or regulation of the city, not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to filing of a request for a construction permit, grantee shall provide to the director of transportation a copy of all the construction work plans and drawings for the system, or any segment or expansion thereof. Grantee shall not proceed with construction until the plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the above-listed city official or his designee. All work shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
Section 21.1.6 - As Built Drawings. 
Grantee shall submit to the director of transportation "as built" drawings of the portions of grantee's system located along the public right-of-way of a size and material satisfactory to the director of transportation within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of such portions. Grantee shall update such drawings within sixty (60) days whenever material changes are made to grantee's system which impact the public right-of-way. Said drawings, set forth by utility quarter sections, shall, at a minimum, include cable routings and the location of amplifiers, power supplies and system monitor test points. 
Section 21.1.7 - Construction Standards. 
(a)  All work done in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the system shall be subject to and governed by all laws, rules, and regulations of the City of Roswell. Grantee shall excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance of all or a portion of its system. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation. Such installation must be set at and maintained at the location and depth specified in grantee's permit. 
(b)  In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation, grantee may install its service above ground; provided, that at such time as those facilities are required to be placed underground by the city, or are placed underground, grantee shall likewise place its services underground without additional cost to the city. 
(c)  Grantee shall at all times comply fully with provisions of the state minimum building codes as adopted by the City of Roswell. 
(d)  Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property and utilities. Grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and maintained so that such facilities shall: 
(1)  Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of persons; 
(2)  Not interfere with any improvements the city or state may deem proper to make; 
(3)  Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; 
(4)  Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair; nor 
(5)  Obstruct, hinder or interfere with any existing gas, electric, water or telephone facilities or other utilities within the city. 
(e)  Protect structures. In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of the system, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures and improvements, including landscaping and trees belonging to the city, and all designated historical landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated historical district. The grantee shall obtain the prior approval of the city before altering or crossing any water main, sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal, state or federally owned structure in the streets required because of the presence of the system in the streets. Any such alteration shall be made by the grantee at its sole cost and expense, and in a manner prescribed by the city. The grantee shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair and restore to serviceable condition in a manner as may be specified by the city, any street or any municipal, state or federally owned structure involved in the construction of the system that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of the grantee pursuant to its franchise. 
(f)  Erection, removal and use of poles. No poles shall be erected by grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, types and any other pertinent aspect. Such pole or structures shall be removed or modified by grantee at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Approval under this section shall require the written approval of the department of transportation. 
(g)  Upon request of the city or other authority of competent jurisdiction, grantee shall remove and abate any portion of the system or any facility that is dangerous to life or property, and in case grantee, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the same, at the sole cost and expense of grantee, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee. 
Section 21.1.8 - Suspension or Revocation of Construction Permit. 
The director of transportation may suspend or revoke any permit issued by the department of transportation or take any action he deems necessary, including the stopping of work, should grantee materially violate the terms of said permit, until said violation has been corrected to said director's satisfaction. 
Section 21.1.9 - Adjustment of Utility Facilities. 
In the event that the location of grantee's system will require an adjustment of the installation of existing public or private utility facilities, grantee must obtain written consent of the owner of such utility, including, where applicable, all relevant city departments to such adjustment and make such arrangements for the payment or reimbursement of the cost of such adjustment as are satisfactory to the owner of such utility, including, where applicable, all relevant city departments. No permit for construction will be issued until the director of the department of transportation is satisfied that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. In no case shall grantee be entitled to perform such adjustment or disturb such utility facilities without the written consent of the owner of such utility. 
Section 21.1.10 - Adjoining Property Owners. 
All of grantee's system shall be so installed and located so as to cause minimum interference with the rights and appearance and reasonable convenience of adjoining property owners and at all times shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate and substantial condition, and in good order and repair. Grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care, and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
Section 21.1.11 - Emergency or Disaster. 
In case of emergency or disaster, grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city within twenty-four (24) hours of such request, without cost, for temporary emergency use. 
Section 21.1.12 - Moving Wires. 
If determined to be necessary to promote the public health, welfare and safety, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, the city may, in its reasonable discretion, take such action with respect to grantee's system in the streets or in city government buildings as it deems necessary to promote the public health, welfare and safety, in which event the city shall not be liable therefor to the grantee. The city shall notify grantee of the necessity for such action with respect to grantee's system as soon as practicable. 
Section 21.1.13 - Temporary Removal of Facilities for Demolition of Buildings. 
Upon the request of a person holding a permit issued by the city for the moving or demolition of a building, and at least ten (10) days' notice, grantee shall temporarily raise, lower or remove its facilities to permit the removal or demolition of such building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same and grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance provided, however, that no payment (direct or indirect) shall be required of the city. 
Section 21.1.14 - Joint Use; Occupancy of City Owned Conduit. 
Every public utility and every grantee may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city by other public utilities and grantees, in so far as such joint use may be reasonably practicable or necessitated by space limitations in the right-of-way. Such joint use shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code and conditioned upon payment of reasonable rental therefor based upon market rates, including without limitation a reasonable pro rata share of construction costs; provided, that in the absence of agreement, upon application by any public utility or grantee, the council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor, which award shall be final. Grantee may require any such person or entity to furnish evidence of adequate insurance covering grantee and adequate bonds covering the performance of the person or entity attaching to grantee's facilities as a condition precedent to granting permission to any such person or entity to attach wires or equipment to grantee's facilities provided, that grantee's requirements for such insurance shall be reasonable. 
If the city owns or leases conduit in the path of grantee's proposed telecommunications facilities, and provided it is technologically feasible for grantee to occupy the conduit owned or leased by the city, grantee shall be required to occupy the conduit owned or leased by the city in order to reduce the necessity to excavate the rights-of-way. Grantee shall pay to the city a fee for such occupancy which shall be the cost grantee would have expended to construct its own conduit from the outset, as certified by the grantee's engineer and approved by the city's department of transportation. The city and grantee may agree to amortize the fee through annual payments to the city over the term of the franchise, including the time value of money. 
Section 21.1.15 - Removal of City Property. 
No property of the city is to be removed from the right-of-way, including signage on utility poles, without prior approval from the city. 
Section 21.1.16 - Reservation of Rights. 
The city reserves the right to exercise its police and/or proprietary powers to modify, vacate or transfer any right-of-way in use by grantee for a public purpose. At grantee's own risk the city has the predominant right to use its right-of-way in the placement, maintenance and repair of sewers, water mains and other public utilities or to relocate or remove grantee's system where the city determines that the public convenience and/or necessity would be enhanced or for any other public purpose, including, but not limited to the use of any right-of-way used by grantee for public transportation purposes or where the director of transportation determines there is an emergency. The permits referred to in section 21.1.8 may be amended or revoked in whole or in part by the issuing department whenever such action is necessary or advisable for a public purpose. Grantee shall make no claims for costs or damages against the city by reason of such removal or relocation. Within thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee of partial or complete revocation of such permit from the director of transportation, grantee shall start to remove, modify, replace or relocate its facilities as required at its own expense. In the event grantee does not complete the removal, modification, replacement or relocation of its facilities as required by said notice within sixty (60) days of receipt of such notice, or within such extended period as the director of transportation may grant, the director of transportation may cause the same to be done at grantee's expense and all expenses incurred or damages paid by the city on account of such action shall be paid by grantee on demand. Grantee shall remove, replace or modify, at its own expense, the installation of any of its facilities as may be deemed necessary by any other appropriate governmental authority to meet such authority's proper responsibilities. In the event the city exercises its predominant right to use any right-of-way used by grantee for a public purpose, the city shall reasonably cooperate with grantee in finding an alternate site for any telecommunications facilities removed and in avoiding disruption to grantee's telecommunications system to the extent not reasonably required by the city. In an emergency, as determined by the director of transportation, the city may order grantee to remove or relocate its facilities within forty-eight (48) hours. If the city exercises any of its rights pursuant to this section, grantee shall have the option, upon notice to the city administrator of abandoning the portion of its telecommunications system to be so removed or relocated and deleting such portion from the public right-of-way. 
Section 21.1.17 - Reserved. 
Section 21.1.18 - Protection of Trees. 
Trimming of trees and shrubbery within the public right-of-way to prevent contact with grantee's facilities shall be done only in accordance with the standards approved by the city arborist in accordance with the ordinances of the city. Grantee shall comply in all respects with design guidelines. Removal or pruning of any tree or shrub or such tree or shrub's roots shall only be done upon issuance of a permit by the arborist. When trees or shrubs in the public right-of-way are damaged as a result of work undertaken by or on behalf of grantee, grantee shall pay the city within thirty (30) days of submission of a statement by the city, the cost of any treatment required to preserve the tree or shrub and/or cost for removal and replacement of the tree or shrub with landscaping of equal value and/or the value of the tree or shrub prior to the damage or removal, as determined by the arborist or other authorized agent of the city. 
Any damage to trees or shrubs which is the result of neglect or the failure to act in accordance with plans approved by the arborist shall be deemed a violation of this article and punished as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014) 
Section 21.1.19 - Abandonment of Right-of-Way. 
Nothing in this agreement waives or releases the rights of the city in and to the streets. If all or part of the streets are eliminated, discontinued, closed or demapped, the franchise shall cease with respect to such streets upon the effective date of the final action of the city in connection therewith. If the elimination, discontinuance, closing or demapping of all or part of the streets is undertaken for the benefit of any private person, the city shall make reasonable efforts to condition its consent to the elimination, discontinuance, closing or demapping on the agreement of the private person on (i) granting the grantee the right to continue to occupy and use the streets or (ii) reimbursing the grantee for the reasonable costs of relocating the affected equipment. 
Section 21.1.20 - Rights of Abutting Landowners. 
In the event that the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley or right-of-way, such grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights herein granted to grantee. 
Section 21.1.21 - Relocation of the System. 
(a)  New grades or lines. If the grades or lines of any street on which grantee's system is placed are changed at any time during the term of the franchise, then the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city, protect or promptly alter or relocate the system, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event that the grantee refuses or neglects to so protect alter or relocate all or part of the system, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of the system, without any liability to the city, and the grantee shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. 
(b)  Relocation of right-of-way. Wherever a public right-of-way or other public property is being constructed, paved (whether or not such paving is part of a more extensive improvement project), resurfaced, relocated or otherwise altered or improved (including, but not limited to: the installation of sidewalk, curb, gutter, drainage facilities, water mains, or sewer mains, traffic signals or trees) grantee shall, within ninety (90) days of written notice from the director of transportation, and at no cost (direct or indirect) to the city, remove or relocate any grantee facility located within such public right-of-way or public property or perform such work as it deems necessary for the extension of new facilities. In the event the grantee fails to relocate its equipment in a manner approved by the city within ninety (90) days of the city's written notice, absent an extension of time granted by the city, the city may seek revocation of the franchise agreement pursuant to section 21.1.33 of this article. Failure to obtain the city's approval of the location of facilities relocated under this section will be considered a forfeiture under section 21.1.33 of this article. Grantee shall be responsible for any damage it causes to property, including damage to trees and other landscaping, as a result of the relocation or removal of facilities. 
(c)  Time limit—Liquidated damages. Failure of grantee to remove or relocate the facility to a location approved by the city within ninety (90) days of the city's written notice shall entitle the city to recover liquidated damages from grantee. The liquidated damages for failure to remove or relocate a facility shall be $250.00 per diem. If grantee believes it will be unable to complete the relocation within ninety (90) days from receipt of notice from the city, grantee shall explain the reasons for its inability in detail and the city and grantee shall attempt to agree on an alternate schedule, subject, to the city's right to finally determine the schedule and liquidated damages, as long as its decision is not unreasonable. 
Section 21.1.22 - Bonds. 
(a)  Grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, and file with the city administrator, a corporate surety bond with a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and found acceptable by the city attorney both to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of grantee's system, and to secure grantee's performance of its obligations and faithful adherence to all requirements of the ordinance codified in this article. Grantee shall provide this corporate surety bond at the time of execution of a franchise agreement, as required by section 21.1.4 of this article. The franchise agreement shall specify the amount of such bond, conditions for withdrawal, and such other provisions as may be required to insure grantee's faithful performance of its obligations. 
(b)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by the ordinance codified in this chapter or authorized by law; and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such bond shall affect any other right the city may have. 
Section 21.1.23 - Insurance Requirements. 
(a)  On or before the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall file with the city a certificate of insurance and thereafter maintain in full force and effect at all times for the full term of the franchise, at the expense of grantee, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including underground property damage coverage, naming the city as additional insured, written by a company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, protecting the city against liability for loss or bodily injury and property damage occasioned by the installation, removal, maintenance, or operation of the communications system by grantee. The limits of such policy shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Grantee shall also file with the city a certificate of insurance for a comprehensive automobile liability insurance policy written by a company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, for allowed, non-owned, hired and leased vehicles operated by grantee, with limits no less than $1,000,000.00 each accident, single limit, bodily injury and property damage combined, or evidence of self-insurance. 
(c)  Grantee shall also maintain, and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder, and specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, workers compensation and employers liability, valid in the state, in the minimum amount of the statutory limit for workers compensation, and $500,000.00 for employers liability. 
(d)  All liability insurance required pursuant to this section shall be kept in full force and effect by grantee during the existence of the franchise and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and any other conductors and fixtures installed by grantee incident to the maintenance and operation of the communications system as defined in this chapter. All policies shall be endorsed to give the city thirty (30) days' written notice of the intent to amend or cancel by either grantee or the insuring company. 
Section 21.1.24 - Indemnification. 
The grantee and each affiliated person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities, whether special, incidental, consequential or punitive, and all other damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with the award of this franchise, the installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. The grantee and each affiliated person also shall cooperate with the city by providing such nonfinancial assistance as may be requested by the city in connection with any claim arising out of or in connection with the selection of franchisees for, or the negotiation or award of, this agreement. 
Section 21.1.25 - Services to the City. 
Grantee shall cooperate with the city to see that the city's own telecommunications and data transfer needs are met. In addition, grantee shall maintain with the city a current listing of all buildings, both public and private, in which it provides services. No monthly fee shall be charged to the city for this service. 
Section 21.1.26 - Compensation to the City. 
(a)  Franchise Fee. For the reason that the public streets, alleys and rights-of-way to be used by grantee in the operation of its system within the boundaries of the city are valuable, public properties, acquired and maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers, and that the grant to grantee of the use of said public streets, alleys and rights-of-way is a valuable property right, without which the grantee would be required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, the grantee shall pay to the city as a franchise fee a percentage of its gross revenue and/or a charge for each linear foot of fiber laid within the City of Roswell. Such percentage or charge, as well as an annual minimum fee, shall be specified in each franchise agreement required to be adopted by this article. The grantee's obligation to pay the franchise fee including the annual minimum fee shall commence on the effective date of the franchise agreement and continue throughout the term. 
(b)  Franchise Fee Report. All such payment of franchise fees shall be accompanied by a report to the city. 
(c)  Franchise Modification or Renewal Costs. The grantee shall pay at such time and in such manner as the city shall specify to the city or, at the direction of the city, to third parties an amount equal to the reasonable costs the city incurs for the services of third parties (including but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal, renegotiation, transfer, amendment or other modification of this agreement or the franchise. 
(d)  No Credits or Deductions. The compensation and other payments to be made pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to be in the nature of a tax, and shall be in addition to any and all taxes or other fees or charges that the grantee shall be required to pay to the city or to any state or federal agency or authority, all of which shall be separate and distinct obligations of the grantee. 
(e)  Interest on Late Payments. If any payment required by this agreement is not actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in this agreement, the grantee shall pay interest thereon, from the due date to the date paid at a rate equal to one (1) percent per month compounded monthly. 
(f)  Acceptance of Compensation. No acceptance of any compensation payment by the city shall be construed as an accord and satisfaction that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of any payment be construed as a release of any claim that the city may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this agreement. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the city. 
(g)  Remedy for Underpayment. If, as a result of an audit or any other review, the city determines that the grantee has underpaid fees in any twelve-month period by ten (10) percent or more, then, in addition to making full payment of the relevant obligation, including interest as described in subsection (e), the grantee shall reimburse the city for all of the reasonable costs associated with the audit or review, including all reasonable out-of-pocket costs for attorneys, accountants and other consultants. 
(h)  Ordinary Business Expense. Nothing in this agreement is intended to prevent the grantee from treating the compensation and other payments that it pays pursuant to this agreement as an ordinary expense of doing business and, accordingly, from deducting said payments from gross income in any federal, state or local income tax return. 
Section 21.1.27 - Accounts, Records and Reports. 
(a)  Grantee shall keep the city fully informed as to all matters in connection with or affecting the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of grantee's system, grantee's accounting methods and procedures in connection therewith, and the recording and reporting by grantee of all revenues and uncollectibles. 
(b)  Grantee shall keep complete and accurate books of account and records of its business and operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, subject to approval by the city. If required by the FCC, grantee shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by the FCC in 47 CFR Part 32 or its successor and as may be further described herein. The city may require the keeping of additional records or accounts which are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting gross revenues and uncollectibles for purposes of section 21.1.26 of this article. Grantee shall keep its books of account and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available by type of service within the city. 
(c)  Grantee shall file annually with the director of finance and the city administrator, on a form approved by the city, no later than ninety (90) days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, an audited statement of revenues (for that year) attributable to the operations of the grantee's system within. This statement shall present a detailed breakdown of gross revenues and uncollectible accounts for the year. This statement shall be audited by an independent certified public accountant whose report shall accompany the statement. The city may, if it sees fit, have the books and records of grantee examined by a representative of said city to ascertain the correctness of the reports agreed to be filed herein. 
(d)  Grantee shall report to the city such other information relating to grantee as the city may consider useful and shall comply with the city's determination of forms for reports, the time for reports, the frequency with which any reports are to be made, and if reports are to be made under oath. 
(e)  Grantee shall provide the city with access at reasonable times and for reasonable purposes, to examine, audit and review the papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records of grantee pertaining to the franchise ordinance codified in this chapter. Grantee shall fully cooperate in making available its records and otherwise assisting in these activities. 
(f)  The city may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to grantee's operation of its system within the City of Roswell and Fulton County. Grantee shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
Section 21.1.28 - Dispute Resolution. 
If grantee shall in good faith maintain that the amount, terms or nature of any adjustment to compensation proposed by the city pursuant to section 21.1.26 is excessive or unreasonable, given the value of the privileges granted under this article and grantee's franchise, grantee shall enter into good faith negotiations with the city as expeditiously as possible to reach an agreement as to the adjustment to compensation. In the event that an agreement as to adjustment to compensation is not reached, grantee shall have the right to make a demand for arbitration in writing to the city administrator. In such event, the city and grantee shall each appoint an arbitrator and a third arbitrator shall be appointed by the arbitrators so appointed. Each arbitrator shall have at least five (5) years of experience in the field of rights-of-way procurement. Pursuant to the then current rules of the American Arbitration Association, or any successor organization, an arbitration shall be held as expeditiously as possible. 
Section 21.1.29 - Extension of Term; Continuing Obligation and Holdover. 
If the grantee continues to use the telecommunications system to provide services after the term, then the grantee shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this agreement, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions of this agreement, throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of this agreement or the franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the city as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution. If this agreement terminates for any reason whatsoever and the grantee fails to cease using telecommunications system to provide service, the city, in addition to all other remedies available to it under this agreement or by law, shall be entitled to receive all payments it is entitled to receive under this agreement including, but not limited to, the compensation set forth in subsection 21.1.26(a). 
Section 21.1.30 - Renewal. 
The grantee may submit a written petition to the city to renew the franchise not later than six (6) months nor more than twelve (12) months before the end of the term. Any proposed renewal, extension or modification of the franchise is subject to the council's approval, modification or rejection and conditioned upon grantee's continuing compliance with this ordinance and others respecting use of the public right-of-way. 
Section 21.1.31 - Assignment or Transfer of Franchise. 
Neither the franchise, the assets held by grantee under the franchise, nor any rights or obligations of the grantee in the equipment or pursuant to this agreement, nor any guaranty of the performance of the grantee's obligations pursuant to this agreement, nor any part of the capacity of the equipment, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by grantee to any other person, firm, corporation, affiliate or entity, without the written consent of the city by mayor and council, which permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. The prior written consent of the city shall not be required with respect to the purchase of services in connection with the telecommunications system, or the purchase of capacity of the telecommunication system or the equipment at wholesale rates for the purpose of resale at the retail level unless such purchase involves all or substantially all the services or capacity of the telecommunications system or the equipment or is otherwise intended to evade the consent requirements of this article. Any such transfer or assignment may be subject to additional conditions as specified in the franchise agreement. 
Section 21.1.32 - Violations; Breach Procedures. 
Upon evidence being received by the city that any violation of the franchise ordinance, any City of Roswell Charter provisions or any ordinances lawfully regulating grantee in the construction and operation of this system is occurring, or has occurred the city shall cause an investigation to be made. The city shall notify the grantee, in writing, of an alleged breach, which notice shall specify the alleged breach with reasonable particularity. The grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice or such longer period of time as the city may specify in such notice, either cure such alleged breach or, in a written response to the city, either present facts and arguments in refutation or excuse of such alleged breach or state that such alleged breach will be cured and set forth the method and time schedule for accomplishing such cure. 
If the city determines that a breach has occurred and that such breach is not excusable and has not been or will not be cured by the grantee in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the city, then the city shall prepare a written report which may recommend the action to be taken by the city's governing body. The city shall provide notice and a copy of such report to the grantee. In the event that the city's governing body determines that such breach has not occurred, or that such breach either has been or will be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the city's governing body, or that such breach is excusable, such determination shall conclude the investigation. 
If the city's governing body determines that such breach has occurred, and that such breach has not been and will not be cured in a manner and in accordance with a schedule reasonably satisfactory to the city's governing body, and that such breach is not excusable, then the city may take any action authorized by law, including revocation or repeal of the franchise or a suit in court to compel compliance. If, in any such proceeding default is finally established, grantee shall be required to pay to the city the reasonable expenses incurred in the prosecution of such suit and all the city's damages and costs (including attorney's fees). 
Section 21.1.33 - Revocation and Termination. 
(a)  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under any franchise or otherwise, the city reserves the right to revoke and terminate any franchise issued by authority of the ordinance codified in this article, and all rights and privileges of grantee hereunder shall cease in the event of material breach, subject to reasonable notice and opportunity to cure, of its terms and conditions. A material breach of grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Grantee's violation of any material provision of the franchise ordinance codified in this article or any material rule, order or regulation of the city made pursuant to the franchise ordinance codified in this article; 
(2)  Grantee's failure to properly compensate the city as required in the franchise ordinance codified in this article; 
(3)  Grantee's attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise ordinance codified in this article or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or upon grantee's end-user customers or inter-exchange carriers; 
(4)  Grantee's failure to comply with section 21.1.5 of this chapter; 
(5)  For failure to file and maintain the bond, security or insurance required under this chapter; 
(6)  Grantee's failure to comply with section 21.1.26 of this chapter; 
(7)  Grantee's failure to respond to or comply with reports, audits, statements and other information lawfully requested by the city; 
(8)  Grantee's failure to operate its system for six (6) months after it has been constructed; or 
(9)  Grantee's material misrepresentation of fact in its application or negotiations during the franchise process; or the conviction of any director, officer, employee or agent of grantee for the offense of bribery or fraud connected with or resulting from the award of the franchise to grantee. 
(b)  The foregoing shall not constitute a material breach if the violation occurs without the fault of grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers or employees. Revocation or termination shall only take place for material cause. 
(c)  If any provision of this chapter shall be preempted by state or federal regulations, or finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the council further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted, the city reserves the right to revoke and terminate any franchise issued under authority of this chapter. 
Article 21.2 - Standards for Wireless Communication Facilities 

Section 21.2.1 - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless communications towers and antennas which will encourage the development of wireless communications while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the public and maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The goals of this ordinance are: 
(a)  To protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of telecommunications towers, antenna support structures and wireless communications facilities; 
(b)  To minimize the total number of towers and antennas within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of Roswell; 
(c)  To locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; 
(d)  To encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; 
(e)  To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless communications facilities by insuring that such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed, modified, maintained, and removed when no longer used or when determined to be structurally unsound; 
(f)  To preserve those areas of significant scenic or historic merit; 
(g)  To facilitate implementation of a master siting plan for the City of Roswell; 
(h)  To promote and encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; 
(i)  To enhance the ability of the providers of wireless communications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.2 - Definitions. 
Accessory use. A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. 
Alternative tower structure means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures, that in the opinion of council, are compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and effectively camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna shall mean any exterior transmitting or receiving devices mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio, wireless telecommunications signals or other communications signals. Such definition does not include, for purposes of this article, radar antennas, amateur radio antennas, satellite earth stations, MMDS antennas, television receiving antennas and direct broadcast satellite dishes. 
Co-location is the placement of antennas of two (2) or more service providers on the same tower or accessory structure. 
Height when referring to a tower or other structure, means distance measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. 
Historic or scenic views mean geographic areas in Roswell which have been formally designated as part of the historic district; have been included in any nature preserve or scenic preservation efforts; or have sufficient historic or scenic merit as determined by council and the historic preservation commission so as to require preservation. A scenic view may be from a stationary viewpoint or be seen as one travels along a roadway or path. 
Master siting plan refers to the siting map developed by council and approved by city council to identify appropriate sites for the location of wireless transmission facilities as may be amended from time to time. Such map may be derived from propriety information submitted by wireless providers. 
Microcell means a wireless communication facility comprised of antennas extending no more than four (4) feet above the structure to which it is attached, and with an area no larger than five hundred seventy-six (576) square inches (e.g. 3' x 1½') panel antenna or a two-foot diameter parabolic antenna as viewed from any one point. 
Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas mean any tower or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
Technically feasible and viable means capable of being provided through technology which has been demonstrated in actual applications (not simply through tests or experiments) to operate in a workable manner. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supported or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, and cellular telephone or PCS towers. 
Wireless transmission facilities shall mean the buildings, cabinets, equipment and property, including but not limited to, generating and switching stations, repeaters, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas, towers, alternative tower structures, electronics and other appurtenances used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer low-power mobile voice transmission, data transmission or other wireless communications by linking a wireless network of radio wave transmitting devices through a series of short range, contiguous cells that are part of an evolving cell grid. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.3 - Applicability. 
All new towers and antennas shall be subject to the regulations contained within this article except as provided in subsections (a) through (c), inclusive: 
(a)  Public Property. Nothing in this article shall be read to prohibit a government owned tower from being located at a specific site when the tower is required to protect the public welfare or safety. 
(b)  Amateur Radio; Receive-Only Antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any amateur radio tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
(c)  Pre-Existing Towers and Antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the provisions of this ordinance, other than the requirements of section 21.2.7. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this ordinance as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." However, in the event a preexisting tower or antenna ceases to function, then the subject tower, antenna and related equipment shall be removed from the subject property within ninety (90) days. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003, (c)) 
Section 21.2.4 - General Requirements. 
(a)  An application shall be required for the construction or placement of all new wireless transmission facilities and new co-location facilities, antennas or towers within the city limits. Approval of any application for the construction of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
(1)  Proximity to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(2)  The proposed height of the tower; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
(5)  Design of the facility, with particular reference to design characteristics which have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(6)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
(7)  Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative technologies (microcells) not requiring the use of towers or structures; 
(8)  Demonstrated need for the telecommunications facility at the specified site; 
(9)  Utilization of the City of Roswell Master Siting Plan, as amended. 
(b)  All applications submitted to the community development department shall include a complete inventory of the applicant's existing wireless transmission facilities including towers and receivers/transmitters located within the City of Roswell or a one-half-mile radius surrounding the city limits, including each asset's location (plane coordinates), height and co-location usage or capabilities, and any special design features. The city shall utilize such information, subject to any restrictions on disclosure requested by the applicant, to promote co-location alternatives for other applicants. 
(c)  At the time of filing the application for construction or placement of a wireless transmission facility, the applicant shall provide a site plan and information regarding tower or accessory structure location, neighboring uses and proposed landscaping as described below. Additional documentation to be submitted with the site plan and certified by an experienced radio frequency engineer shall delineate coverage and propagation zones, identify type of antenna and mounting location, specify type of band currently in use, and state co-location capabilities. 
(1)  The scaled site plan shall clearly indicate the location, type and height of the proposed tower or accessory structure to be utilized, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning including proximity to historic or scenic view corridors, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks for property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, accessory structure and any other structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed necessary by council to assess compliance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable). 
(3)  A definition of the area of coverage and radio frequency goals to be served by the antenna or tower and the extent to which such antenna or tower is needed for coverage and/or capacity. 
(4)  The setback distance between the proposed wireless transmission facility and the nearest residential unit or residentially used structure. 
(5)  Structural integrity analysis where antennas and equipment will be attached to an existing structure 
(6)  Landscaping shall be designed in such a way as to preserve existing mature growth and to provide in the determination of the design review board, a suitable buffer of plant materials that mitigates the view of the telecommunications facility and accessory structures from surrounding property. 
(d)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00 to offset the costs associated with processing such application. In addition, applicants shall be responsible for independent engineering costs incurred by the city which exceed such fee up to an additional $2,000.00, if requested by the city. The applicant shall be responsible for additional fees throughout the process as described further within this ordinance. All fees are subject to change as amended by the mayor and city council by resolution. 
(e)  Landscaping plans and the design and placement of the wireless transmission facility on an approved site shall require review and approval of the Roswell Design Review Board prior to issuance of a building permit to insure architectural and aesthetic compatibility with the surrounding area. 
(f)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act, 16 U.S.C. § 461 et seq. shall be demonstrated. 
(g)  In approving any application, the zoning director, design review board, or council may impose additional conditions to the extent determined necessary to minimize adverse effects on adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.5 - Development Requirements for Towers. 
(a)  Towers may be located only in the following zoning districts subject to the restrictions and standards contained herein: 
AG-43, CX, CC, CH, IX, IL or CIV 
Wireless transmission facilities in OP, the other districts shall be alternative tower structures only; provided however, towers may be allowed on publicly owned property regardless of Unified Development Code (UDC) district. 
(b)  No new wireless transmission facilities shall be located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any preexisting wireless transmission site unless such new facility is concealed through use of alternative tower structures or is otherwise camouflaged, and a variance is granted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Roswell. 
(c)  All applicants seeking to erect a tower must demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna(s). Evidence of an engineering nature shall be documented by the submission of a certification by an engineer. Such evidence may consist of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  No existing structure is of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  No existing tower or structure has sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment. 
(4)  Applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing tower or structure. 
(5)  Such other limiting factor(s) as may be demonstrated by the applicant and verified by an engineer of the city's choosing. 
(d)  Setbacks: Setbacks for towers and above-ground transmission facilities shall be as follows: 
(1)  All transmission facilities, except buried portions, shall be set back from all adjoining properties zoned non-residential a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, the tower and entire transmission facility must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
(e)  Unless otherwise specified by community development staff and the design review board, towers shall be enclosed by vinyl chain link security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
(f)  All new towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet which do not incorporate alternative design features must be designed and built in a manner that allows other entities to co-locate on the structure using the following guidelines: 
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHTS 

 
(g)  All towers and their related structures shall maximize the use of building materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that, in the opinion of the design review board and staff, effectively blend the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built environment. Where appropriate, towers shall be painted so as to reduce their visual obtrusiveness, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2003-12-32, Amended, 12/08/2003, (a) amended; 2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.6 - Approval Process. 
(a)  Subject to certification by the zoning director of compliance with the general requirements and standards enumerated above and with the consent of council, the following uses are subject to expedited approval, which shall be defined as approval within thirty (30) days of receiving applications, supporting engineering certifications and lease approval, if any, without the necessity of public hearing: 
(1)  Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Roswell provided accessory structures are located underground, where technically feasible, and a license, permit or lease authorizing such tower is thereafter approved by City of Roswell. 
(2)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure, so long as said installation is considered to be a stealth technology installation that does not significantly change the profile of the existing structure and so that the installation is not readily noticeable to the untrained eye. Such installations including cables leading to the antennas shall be painted to match the paint and colors on the existing structure and shall not protrude from the existing structure in a noticeable fashion. 
(3)  Co-location by installing an antenna on any existing tower or alternative tower structure. 
(4)  Replacing an existing tower with a new tower designed to accommodate two (2) or more users so long as such new tower does not exceed the height limitations of subsection 21.2.5(f) and setback requirements of this article are met. After the replacement tower is built, only one (1) tower shall remain on such site. Support equipment shall, where technically feasible, be located underground. 
(5)  Locating any alternative tower structures provided accessory structures are located underground, where technically feasible, or otherwise incorporated into the alternative structure. 
(6)  Installing any antenna or tower not to exceed the limitations contained in subsection 21.2.5(f) in any area zoned AG-43, CX, CC, CH, OP, IX, IL or CIV and provided accessory structures are located underground, where technically feasible, or shielded to the satisfaction of the design review board. 
(7)  Installing any antenna or tower in a location identified on the City of Roswell Master Siting Plan, as amended, provided accessory structures are located underground where technically feasible, or shielded to the satisfaction of the design review board. 
If council determines that any application does not meet the general application requirements, development requirements and/or standards enumerated herein, or such application conflicts with the Master Siting Plan, approval of the application shall be denied provided substantial evidence exists to support such denial. Any aggrieved party may appeal the denial to the Fulton County Superior Court. For purposes of this section, an aggrieved party is one who demonstrates that his or her property will suffer special damage as a result of the decision complained of rather than merely some damage that is common to all property owners and citizens similarly situated. 
(b)  If the proposed tower or antenna is not included under the above described expedited approval uses, or the application does not on its face satisfy the development standards and other criteria specified herein, then a public hearing before the mayor and council shall be required for the approval of the construction of a wireless transmission facility in all Unified Development Code (UDC) districts. Applicants shall apply for a public hearing through the community development department and pay the required $500.00 fee at such time. Applications, when complete, shall be placed on the next available agenda of the mayor and council at which Unified Development Code (UDC) matters are considered. At least thirty (30) days prior to any scheduled hearing, the community development department shall cause a sign to be posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation and notice sent to surrounding property owners as shown on the county tax records within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed tower or antenna. Said notice shall state the nature of the application, street location of the proposal and height of the proposed structure. 
Before approving an application for an "other use," the governing authority may impose Unified Development Code (UDC) conditions to the extent necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. The factors considered in granting such a permit include those enumerated in sections 21.2.4 and 21.2.5. The mayor and council may waive one (1) or more of these criteria, if, in their discretion doing so will advance the goals of this article as stated in section 21.2.1. Approved applications shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of the approval by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014; 2010-03-06, § 10, Amended, 03/08/2010; 2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.7 - Maintenance of Facilities. 
(a)  All wireless transmission facilities and related landscaping shall be maintained by the facility owner in good condition, order, and repair so that they shall not endanger the life or property of any person, nor shall they be a blight upon the property. 
(b)  All maintenance or construction on wireless transmission facilities shall be performed by persons employed by or under contract to the owner between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday except in cases of emergency or when an after-hours permit is obtained pursuant to section 5.1.13 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. Access to facilities on city owned property shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the department responsible for such property. The hours of access to city sites shall not exceed those specified above. Persons may not be present on site unless performing construction or maintenance at such site. 
(c)  The owner or user of any telecommunications facility shall be required to submit a "facility in use certification" annually to the community development department. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or is not properly maintained shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same and any structures housing supporting equipment within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed or returned to good condition within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.8 - Waiver of Requirements. 
No exception, waiver or variance to the conditions and requirements contained herein shall be granted unless expressly provided for in this ordinance, or the mayor and council find that the proposed tower or wireless transmission facility is necessary and essential to providing the wireless service. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Sections 21.2.9, 21.2.10 - Reserved. 
Section 21.2.11 - Facilities Lease. 
The city council may approve facilities leases for the location of wireless transmission facilities and other telecommunications facilities upon city owned property. Neither this section, nor any other provision of this article shall be construed to create an entitlement or vested right in any person or entity of any type. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.12 - Lease Application. 
Any person that desires to solicit the city's approval of a facilities lease pursuant to this article shall file a lease proposal with the city's community development department which, in addition to the information required by section 21.2.4, shall include the following: 
(a)  A description of the wireless transmission facilities or other equipment proposed to be located upon city property; 
(b)  A description of the city property upon which the applicant proposes to locate wireless transmission facilities or other equipment; 
(c)  Preliminary plans and specifications in sufficient detail to identify: 
(1)  The location(s) of existing wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities or other equipment upon the city property, whether publicly or privately owned; 
(2)  The location and source of electric and other utilities required for the installation and operation of the proposed facilities; 
(d)  Accurate scaled conceptual drawings and diagrams of sufficient specificity to analyze the aesthetic impacts of the proposed wireless transmission facilities or other equipment; 
(e)  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service from the facility, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising; 
(f)  An accurate map showing the location of any wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease; 
(g)  A landscaping bond in an amount to be determined by the city arborist; 
(h)  Such other and further information as may be requested by the city; and 
(i)  An application fee for lease negotiation in the amount of $250.00. 
Section 21.2.13 - Determination by the City. 
Recognizing that the city is under no obligation to grant a facilities lease for the use of city property, the city shall strive to consider and take action on applications for facilities leases within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application for such a lease. When such action is taken, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the lease in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth below, or any other such criteria as the mayor and city council may choose to apply. If the lease application is denied, the determination shall include the reason for denial following review of these factors: 
(a)  The capacity of the city property and public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities. 
(b)  The capacity of the city property and public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and wireless transmission or telecommunications facilities if the lease is granted. 
(c)  The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the lease is granted. 
(d)  The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction upon city property and within the public ways. 
(e)  The service that applicant will provide to the community and region. The effect, if any, on public health, safety, and welfare if the lease requested is approved. The availability of alternate locations for the proposed facilities. 
(f)  Whether the applicant is in compliance with applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies, including, but not limited to, the registration requirements administered by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(g)  The potential of radio frequency and other interference with existing public and private telecommunications or other facilities located upon the city property. 
(h)  The potential for radio frequency and other interference or impact upon residential, commercial, and other uses located within the vicinity of the city property. 
(i)  Recommendations of the recreation commission with respect to impact on park and recreation activities. 
(j)  Recommendations of the public works department with respect to maintenance and security of water towers. 
(k)  Such other factors, such as aesthetics, as those factors may impact the community. 
(l)  The maximization of co-location opportunities with other similar uses. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.14 - Agreement. 
No facilities lease shall be deemed to have been granted hereunder until the applicant and the city have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions under which the lessee has been granted the right to occupy and use the city property. 
Section 21.2.15 - Nonexclusive Lease. 
No facilities lease granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use city property for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes nor shall approval of a lease entitle the applicant to a permit to construct or place a wireless transmission facility. 
Section 21.2.16 - Term of Facilities Lease. 
Unless otherwise specified in a lease agreement, a facilities lease granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of up to five (5) years, with the lessee granted a maximum of three (3) five-year renewal options which options shall also be subject to approval of council. The term of any such agreement shall not exceed twenty (20) years. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.17 - Rights Granted. 
No facilities lease granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the city property, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the city property for the limited purposes and term stated in the lease agreement. Further, no facilities lease shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
Section 21.2.18 - Interference with Other Users. 
No facilities lease shall be granted under this article unless it contains a provision which is substantially similar to the following: 
The city has previously entered into leases with other tenants for their equipment and wireless transmission facilities. Lessee acknowledges that the city is also leasing the city property for the purposes of transmitting and receiving telecommunication signals from the city property. The city, however, is not in any way responsible or liable for any interference with lessee's use of the city property which may be caused by the use and operation of any other tenant's equipment, even if caused by new technology. In the event that any other tenant's activities interfere with the lessee's use of the city property, and the lessee cannot work out this interference with the other tenants, the lessee may, upon thirty (30) days' notice to the city, terminate this lease and restore the city property to its original condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted. The lessee shall cooperate with all other tenants to identify the causes of and work towards the resolution of any electronic interference problem. In addition, the lessee agrees to eliminate any radio or television interference caused to city-owned facilities or surrounding residences at lessee's own expense and without installation of extra filters on city-owned equipment. Lessee further agrees to accept such interference as may be received from city operated telecommunications or other facilities located upon the city property subject to this lease. 
Section 21.2.19 - Ownership and Removal of Improvements. 
No facilities lease shall be granted under this article unless it contains a provision which states that all buildings, landscaping, and all other improvements, except telecommunications equipment, shall become the property of the city upon expiration or termination of the lease. In the event that the city requires removal of such improvements, such removal shall be accomplished at the sole expense of the lessee and completed within ninety (90) days after receiving notice from the city requiring removal of the improvements. In the event that wireless transmission facilities or other equipment are left upon city property after expiration or termination of the lease, they shall become the property of the city if not removed by the lessee upon thirty (30) days' written notice from the city. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.20 - Compensation to the City. 
Each facilities lease granted under this article is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the rights granted to the lessee; provided, nothing in these sections shall prohibit the city and a lessee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. Such compensation shall be payable in advance of the effective date of the lease and on or before January 31 of each calendar year. Any payments received after the due date shall include a late payment penalty of two (2) percent of the annual rental fee for each day or part thereof past the due date. The compensation shall be negotiated by the city administrator or designee, subject to the city council's final approval, based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Comparable lease rates for other public or private property; 
(2)  In the case land is leased, an appraisal opinion upon which the land and air space is rented; 
(3)  If structure of another user is involved, any amount needed to reimburse that user; in addition to the above; 
(4)  A yearly escalator rate commonly used in comparable leases; 
(5)  The additional rent such structure may generate if leased to additional users (the city should be entitled to rent as a result of a sublease); and 
(6)  Additional fees or charges may be established by the city to cover actual costs of processing the application, including engineering review, inspection and appraisal cost, legal, administration of the agreement, providing on-site services, and/or other direct or indirect costs. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.21 - Amendment of Facilities Lease. 
Except as provided within an existing lease agreement, a new lease application and lease agreement shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or other entity that desires to expand, modify, or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment located upon city property. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities or other equipment on the city property, the city shall grant a lease amendment without further application. Such amendment must be approved by council. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.22 - Renewal Application. 
A lessee that desires to exercise a renewal option in its facilities lease under this article shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than one hundred twenty (120) days before expiration of the current facilities lease term, file an application with the city for renewal of its facilities lease which shall include the following: 
(a)  The information required pursuant to section 21.2.12 of this article; 
(b)  Any information required pursuant to the facilities lease agreement between the city and the lessee; 
(c)  A report certified by a radio frequency engineer that the site is in compliance with current FCC radio emission standards; 
(d)  All deposits or charges required pursuant to this article; and 
(e)  An application fee which shall be set by the city council as referenced in this ordinance or as amended from time to time by resolution. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.23 - Renewal Determination. 
Recognizing that the city is under no obligation to grant a renewal of a facilities lease for the use of city property, the city shall strive to consider and take action on applications for renewal of such leases within thirty (30) days after receiving a complete application for such a lease renewal. When such action is taken, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the lease renewal in whole or in part, applying the standards set forth below, or any other such criteria as the city council may choose to apply. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reason for denial, such denial may be made after review of these factors or on other grounds as determined by mayor and council: 
(a)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(b)  The legal ability of the applicant. 
(c)  The continuing capacity of the city property to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities. 
(d)  The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this article and the lease agreement. 
(e)  Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies. 
(f)  Continued need for the facility in light of technological advances and current industry standards. 
(g)  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the city property will serve the community interest. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.24 - Obligation to Cure as a Condition of Renewal. 
No facilities lease shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the lessee's performance of the lease agreement, or of the requirements of these sections, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the lessee has been approved by the city. In no event shall a facilities lease be renewed if lessee fails to cure. 
(2003-07-17, Amended, 07/07/2003) 
Section 21.2.25 - Small Cell Technology. 
(a)  As used in this section the terms below are defined as follows: 
Accessory equipment means any equipment (other than an antenna) serving or being used in conjunction with small cell technology or small cell technology wireless support structures and includes, but is not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or similar structures, whether mounted on a small cell technology wireless support structure or on the ground. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services. 
Application means a formal request submitted to the city to construct a small cell technology wireless support structure or to co-locate small cell technology(ies). An application shall be deemed complete when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the city's regulations, ordinances and forms pertaining to the location, construction or operation of small cell technologies are submitted by the applicant to the city. The city shall comply with the timeframes set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-5-1(b) regarding review and approvals of such applications. 
Co-location means the placement or installation of new small cell wireless technology on an existing pole or small cell technology wireless support structure of the city, a certified utility or other entity legally existing in the public right of way. Such term includes the placement of accessory equipment on such pole or wireless support structure within an existing equipment compound, if any. 
Equipment compound means an area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a small cell technology support structure within which accessory equipment is or may be located. 
Small cell technology means (1) individual small cell wireless antennas; or (2) networks of spatially separated small cell wireless antenna nodes connected to a common source via transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area. 
Small cell technology wireless support structure means a free-standing structure (node or pole), designed to support or capable of supporting small cell technology wireless facilities. 
Stealth design means a method of concealing or reducing the visual impact of small cell technology and/or a small cell technology wireless support structure by use of incorporating features or elements of the installation or into the installation intended to minimize the visual impact of or otherwise blend such small cell technology, accessory equipment and/or small cell technology wireless support structure into the surrounding environment; or otherwise minimize the visual impact of the structure. 
Substantial change shall mean anything that: 
(1)  Increases height by more than ten (10) percent or ten (10) feet (right-of-way), whichever is greater, as measured from structure as it exists; 
(2)  Increases or adds to appurtenances that protrude from body of structure more than five (5) feet in width; 
(3)  Involves installing ground cabinets or involves installation of pole or support structure mounted cabinets at a height twelve (12) feet or lower. 
(4)  Involves excavation or deployment outside the current "site." "Site" shall be defined as the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the support structure and any access or utility easements (private property) or the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground (right-of-way). 
(b)  Placement of small cell technologies in the right-of-way . The following standards shall apply for the placement of small cell technology in the public right-of-way or public road: 
(1)  In order to initially place small cell technology within the city right-of-way, an applicant shall submit an application as defined herein and may concurrently obtain a small cell technology permit from the City of Roswell City Administrator or his/her designee. Such application shall contain all information required by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b) (1) for telephone companies, if applicable (if not applicable, applicant shall give reasons for such), a conceptual siting map of initial small cell technology deployment within the City of Roswell, the type of stealth design the applicant intends to utilize and a verified statement of the services to be provided through use of such small cell technology. Provided the application and initial small cell technology permit are approved, any subsequent small cell technology deployments within the city rights-of-way complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be permitted, by a small cell encroachment permit through the City of Roswell Transportation Department. 
(2)  Any small cell technology in a city right-of-way shall be co-located on the property of the City of Roswell, a certified utility or other entity already legally existing in the public right-of-way, unless an administrative variance is granted. An administrative variance may be approved if the applicant can demonstrate that no co-location opportunities exist, utilizing the same factors as in subsection (b)(4) of this section. Any proposal for adding small cell technology onto existing small cell technology structures must not be in conflict with city's clean pole policy and shall include certifications of the ability of such structure to hold such small cell technology. 
An applicant may apply for an administrative variance from the co-location requirement from the city administrator or designee if a substantial change will take place or if the applicant seeks the placement of a new small cell wireless support structure within the area of the public right-of-way. A denial of such an administrative variance may be appealed to the mayor and city council. Routine maintenance of small cell technology or a small cell wireless support structure within the public ROW, after a small cell technology application and/or small cell encroachment permit has been approved will require a small cell encroachment permit from the city. Emergency repairs to deal with system outage, pole or support structure damage or a public hazard shall be carried out with advanced notice to the transportation department and any lane closures and work zones shall be in accordance with Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) Standards. A small cell encroachment permit shall be applied for within two (2) business days from the commencement of such emergency work. 
(3)  An Application fee for small cell technology within the City of Roswell right-of-way of two-hundred dollars $200.00 shall be required for review of a small cell technology application and issuance of the initial small cell encroachment permit. After approval of the initial small cell technology application and small cell encroachment permit, a small cell technology encroachment permit fee of $100.00 shall be required for processing, review and issuance of small cell technology encroachment permits for other installations within the City of Roswell. The annual fee of three (3) percent of gross revenues or $400.00 for each city owned pole or node; or $300.00 for use of any other small cell technology wireless support structure within the rights-of-way, as such fees are applicable, shall be required for use of the city rights-of-way for each small cell technology. Fees for administrative variances or appeals to mayor and council shall be $100.00 each unless amended by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(4)  Small cell technology permit approvals for small cell technologies on an existing small cell wireless support structures, additional approvals, and the review process, including timelines, shall be in accordance with any applicable state and federal law. In reviewing the small cell technology permit application, the city administrator or his/her designee or the transportation department director shall insure compliance with the existing permits and laws and shall have the authority to assess the location(s) applied for and condition the approval on reasonably alleviating aesthetic and safety concerns, if any. The condition of such approval may include a requirement for stealth design for the co-located small cell technology which stealth design may be, by way of example only and is not limited to, the positioning or direction of the small cell technology or accessory equipment away from the right-of-way. 
(5)  In applying for an administrative variance for a substantial change or new small cell wireless support structure, the review process, including timelines, shall be in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 332 (c) (7) of the Federal Telecommunications Act, and the FCC rules interpreting same, as well as the consideration of the following factors to determine if the administrative variance is appropriate: 
a.  Demonstrated need for the small cell technologies within the geographic area requested in order to deliver adequate service; 
b.  Proof that all co-location sites within the right-of-way in the area of need are/were pursued and have been denied; or that there does not exist the ability to co-locate using an existing structure within the right-of-way. Evidence of inability to co-locate on an existing structure may include structural capacity, load evidence and other design criteria. The applicant must demonstrate all actions taken to achieve co-location. 
c.  The character of the area in which the small cell technology wireless support structure is requested, including evidence of surrounding properties and uses. 
d.  Stealth design, if any, proposed to be utilized by the applicant, or proof that stealth design is either unnecessary or cannot be used. 
e.  Proof that the proposed small cell technology wireless support structure is the minimal physical installation that will achieve the applicant's goals. 
f.  The safety and aesthetic impact of: any proposed small cell technology wireless support structure, related accessory equipment, and/or equipment compound. 
Notwithstanding any of the above factors, a new small cell technology wireless support structure within the right-of-way may not exceed forty-five (45) feet from ground level in height (Class 5) without approval of the mayor and city council. 
(6)  Within sixty (60) calendar days, if for a substantial change co-location, or one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, if for a new small cell wireless support structure, of the date a complete application for an administrative variance is filed with the city, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the city and the applicant, the city administrator shall: 
a.  Make a final decision to approve or disapprove the application; 
b.  Advise the applicant in writing of the final decision, including the specific reason(s) for a decision to deny the application based on the applicable factors in this subsection. 
c.  Advise the applicant of their right to appeal a denial of the application to mayor and council. 
(c)  Placement of small cell technologies on private property . Installation of small cell technology on private property outside of the right-of-way shall follow standards for wireless communication facilities within the city ordinance. 
( 2016-10-19 , § 1, Added 10-10-2016) 
Article 21.3 - Cable Communications 

Section 21.3.1 - Applicability. 
This article applies to the provision of cable services as such term is defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). Cable services shall include "broadband telecommunications systems," or "community antenna television systems" or "CATV systems" and refers to a system composed of, without limitation, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, or any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed, or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, and distributing audio and/or visual radio, television, electronic, or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers, and locations in the City of Roswell. The systems may include, if otherwise lawful, television frequency modulated radio signals disseminated to the general public by licensed broadcasting stations, music originated on premises of grantees, weather information, and news ticker. In the event the grantee shall include television and frequency modulated radio signals disseminated to the general public by licensed broadcasting stations, the grantee agrees to carry these signals consistent with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Section 21.3.2 - Definitions. 
Access channels means those channels required by this article to be kept available by the grantee for partial or total dedication to public access, educational access, and local government access. 
(1)  Public access channel. A specially designated noncommercial public access channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis for which the system shall maintain and have available for public use at least the minimal equipment and facilities necessary for the production of programming for such a channel. 
(2)  Education access channel. A specially designated channel for use by local educational authorities. 
(3)  Local government access channel. A specially designated channel for local government uses. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the company; (ii) each person in which the company has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, general partner, limited partner holding an interest of twenty-five (25) percent or more, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the company; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the company; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the franchising authority, the entity, if any, administering some or all of the access channels, any limited partner holding an interest of less than twenty-five (25) percent of the company, or any creditor of the company solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or common control with, the company. 
Basic service means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any equipment or installation used in connection with basic service. 
Cable communication system, cable system, CATV or broadband means any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, a function of which is to provide cable services and noncable services by receiving through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, antenna, or satellite or microwave transmission, and distributing video, audio, voice, or data signals, whether originating with the franchising authority or elsewhere. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
Channel means a band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum, or any other means of transmission (including without limitation, optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become available), which is capable of carrying a signal, an audio signal, a voice signal, or a data signal. 
Converter means an electronic device, which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view all signals delivered at designated dial locations. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the use and occupation of the streets and public rights-of-way, to provide cable services. 
Grantee shall mean the entity to whom the CATV franchise is awarded and shall include all persons having any rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities or obligations under the franchise agreement, and also all persons having or claiming any title or interest in or to the system, whether by reason of the franchise itself or any subcontract, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, security agreement, management or operating agreement, or otherwise arising or created. 
Gross subscriber revenues shall mean all revenue derived directly or indirectly by a grantee from its CATV system within the city, including but not limited to charges for basic services and additional services, connection and reconnection, leased channels, converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel, and advertising revenues. If a grantee serves areas outside the city and receives revenue for advertising both within and without the city, such advertising revenue shall be prorated to the city on a direct ratio between the number of subscribers within the city, and the total number of subscribers within and without the city. 
Pay service means optional audio or video programs available to subscribers on per channel or per program basis. 
Programmer means any person, firm, corporation or entity who or which produces or otherwise provides program material for transmission by video, audio, digital or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes, to subscribers, by means of the cable communications system. 
Public agency shall mean an agency that is supported wholly, or substantially, by public funds. 
Streets and public right-of-way means the surface of, and that area above and below, any and all streets, alleys, paths, bridges, tunnels, sidewalks, planting strips, medians, waterways, docks, wharves, piers, public grounds and other public places or waters within or belonging to the franchising authority and any other property within the franchising authority to the extent to which there exist public easements or public rights-of-way. 
Subscriber shall mean a person or organization lawfully receiving any service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the system, whether or not a fee is paid for such service. 
System means the communications system which is to be constructed, operated, maintained and upgraded, as necessary, by the company pursuant to this agreement, including, without limitation, all real property, all tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, subscriber lists, cables, amplifiers and all other electronic devices used in connection therewith and all rights, contracts and understandings with regard to any matter related thereto. 
Section 21.3.3 - Granting Authority. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article and no person shall use or occupy city property, including the streets, to provide any telecommunications services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The mayor and council may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this ordinance by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate resolution by mayor and council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate resolution and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to: 
(1)  Grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate; and 
(2)  Engage, for itself, in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
Section 21.3.4 - Franchise Application. 
Before any person, firm, or corporation shall begin to construct or operate a CATV system within the City of Roswell, it shall file a written application for a franchise from the city, with the city administrator, in a form prescribed or acceptable to the city administrator, which application shall contain information showing: 
(a)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter, partnership agreement or other appropriate organizational documentation as is applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant; 
(b)  A list of names and address of the majority shareholders, directors, officers, members, managing partners and/or managing principals of the applicant, as may be applicable; 
(c)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
(d)  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or a funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the city setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system in the city; 
(e)  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; 
(f)  Location and telephone numbers of all offices, branches, and warehouses in North Fulton County; 
(g)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the proposed services, including channel capacity, the number of channels and types of services to be included in basic services, the number of channels and types of services to be included in additional services, the number of two-way channels, the number of access channels and automated channels, facilities for local origination and a list of any additional service or facility to be made available to the city and other public, institutional and community organizations; 
(2)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(3)  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, charges for cable service, and charges for any other telecommunications service; 
(4)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
(5)  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to or for cable services or any other telecommunications services; and 
(6)  A detailed statement setting forth any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise. 
(h)  Evidence of ability to provide policies or certification of insurance as to worker's compensation, liability, and indemnification as prescribed by this article; 
(i)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(j)  Such other pertinent information as required by the city administrator. 
Section 21.3.5 - Application Fee and Responsibility for Associated Costs. 
Each applicant for a franchise hereunder shall submit a processing fee and deposit for costs in the amount of $10,000.00, by certified check, payable to the City of Roswell. The sum provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city in processing and analyzing the application and related documentation, evaluating the applicant and related entities or matters, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's fees and expenses. The application fee will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. 
Section 21.3.6 - Evaluation Criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the mayor and city council may consider such factors as they deem appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(a)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(b)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant, and where applicable, related entities; 
(c)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(d)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of cable services and telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those cable and telecommunications services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(e)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(f)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
Section 21.3.7 - Procedure for Consideration of and Action on Applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the mayor and council deem necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the mayor and council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as they may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to them, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the mayor and council, after considering such information as they determine to be appropriate, elect to further consider one (1) or more applications, the mayor and council may set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the mayor and council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The mayor and council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by them, the mayor and council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that the city as franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(e)  This article and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by the grantee by any written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by the grantee and by the city and filed with the city administrator. The agreement shall incorporate the grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind the grantee to the provisions of the application insofar as they can be legally enforced. The mayor and council may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to the grant of the franchise. 
Section 21.3.8 - Terms and Conditions of Franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in a separate written agreement. Such written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects unless otherwise waived by the city: 
(a)  The term of the franchise; 
(b)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of a franchise; 
(c)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(d)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or canceled; 
(e)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(f)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(g)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(h)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(i)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(j)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(k)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(l)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(m)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(n)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(o)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(p)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(q)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
Section 21.3.9 - Nonexclusive Right of Grantees to Install System. 
Where authorized under the provisions hereof, the grantee shall have the right and privilege to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along any public street, public way, and public place, now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the City of Roswell, Georgia, any poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the broadband telecommunications system, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, and the State of Georgia, and the ordinances and regulations of Roswell, Georgia, commencing from and after the adoption of this article. 
Section 21.3.10 - Requirements for Installation and Maintenance of System. 
(a)  Grantees shall construct, operate, maintain and install a system capable of distributing at least seventy (70) channels or their equivalent. The system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the best accepted standards of the cable industry and the FCC's cable television technical standards. 
(b)  For the purpose of permitting the transmission of signals throughout the metropolitan area, the grantee may interconnect its CATV system with any adjacent CATV system. The grantee shall, on request of the city, interconnect the public, education and government channels and any city controlled institutional network with any and all other cable systems in adjacent or overlapping areas within the city. 
(c)  The grantee shall exercise its best efforts to limit any scheduled interruption of any cable service for any purpose to periods of minimum use. Except in emergencies, the grantee shall provide all affected subscribers with prior notice of scheduled service interruptions, if such interruptions will last longer than thirty (30) minutes. 
(d)  The grantee shall maintain a written record or log listing the date of subscriber complaints, identifying the subscriber, and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. This record shall be kept at the grantee's local office for a period of two (2) years from the date when the complaint initially occurred and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours, without further notice or demand, by the city administrator or a designated representative. 
(e)  If one (1) or more municipalities within the county or the county has granted franchises for the development of a system to other than the grantee or grantees who shall be granted a franchise by Roswell, the franchisee or franchisees shall negotiate with the franchisees serving other parts of the county in order to provide interconnection of the system so that the Fulton County school system can utilize an integrated system providing for simultaneous and exclusive broadcasts and reception by all schools in the system. 
Section 21.3.11 - Maintenance of Office in Area Required. 
The grantees shall provide, at a minimum, the following services to handle consumer and user complaints: 
(a)  Each grantee shall maintain an office in the city or convenient to subscribers, which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs may be received on a twenty-four-hour basis. Such office shall be staffed or equipped with an automated answering service so that FCC customer service standards are met. 
(b)  Each grantee shall maintain a repair and trouble-shooting force capable of responding to subscriber complaints or requests for repair service within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No direct charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service. 
(c)  Each grantee shall ensure that all subscribers, programmers, and members of the public have recourse to a satisfactory hearing of any complaint. Each grantee shall present to the city, no later than three (3) months after the grant of a franchise hereunder, a set of rules, regulations, and procedures concerning the handling and settling of complaints. Provided, further, that each grantee shall provide its subscribers with copies of such policies annually. 
Section 21.3.12 - Operation. 
(a)  The grantee, upon request of the city and without cost to the City of Roswell, shall in accordance with Section 611 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 531) make available channel capacity to be designated for public, educational or governmental ("PEG") use and related equipment and facilities, services and/or financial support for the development and use of PEG access. 
(b)  Channel time for the public access channel shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, without charge to the members of the public. Actual production costs may be charged to the users for live studio programs exceeding five (5) minutes. The grantee shall endeavor to provide such channel time to as many different persons as is practicable, it being the intent that the public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. 
(c)  If a grantee is operating a system within Fulton County, and the county's system is interconnected with the city's system, and if through the interconnection the channels called for by subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section, the Fulton County Board of Education, and the citizens of Roswell are granted all the time they request of the county system channels, a grantee of the city shall not be required to provide separate educational and public access channels to the city. 
(d)  The grantee shall provide without charge basic cable including general subscriber services, and a free service connection to all public schools and support buildings, libraries, and other public buildings designated by the city. 
(e)  The grantee shall, before energizing the system, file with the city administrator an outline of channel allocations and designations and shall thereafter inform the city administrator of any changes or additions to channel allocations and designations. 
(f)  The CATV system shall carry the signal of all noncommercial educational FM radio stations located within Fulton County. 
(g)  The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate any rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the operation and conduct of its business as shall be necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under its franchise with the city, and to ensure uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, however, that these rules, regulations, terms, and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article or federal and state laws. 
Section 21.3.13 - Supervision by the City. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the CATV system, subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules, and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city administrator, director of transportation, or community development and transportation committee may from time to time issue any reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation, and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Technical disputes concerning compliance with FCC technical standards and other agreed upon technical matters between the city and the grantee shall be resolved by submission to arbitration pursuant to the terms of section 21.3.32 hereof. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007) 
Section 21.3.14 - Reports. 
(a)  Each grantee shall file annually the following records and reports with the city not later than three (3) months after the end of its fiscal year: 
(1)  The report to its stockholders, if any. 
(2)  An annual financial report in a form approved by the city administrator containing balance sheet, statement of income, statement of changes in retained earnings, statement of changes in ownership equity, notes to financial statements and supplementary schedules reconciled to the foregoing identifying revenues, expenses and income applicable to the operation of its CATV system. Such statements shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis and shall be audited by an independent certified public accountant. 
(3)  A schedule of property used in its CATV system showing book value on the basis of original cost, less depreciation, with such supporting information as the chief executive may require. 
(4)  "As built" drawings of the portions of grantee's system located along the public right-of-way of a size and material satisfactory to the director of transportation. Said drawings, set forth by utility quarter sections, shall, at a minimum, include cable routings, total physical miles of cable installed, and the location of amplifiers, power supplies and system monitor test points. 
(5)  A copy of proof of performance tests required under FCC regulations and standards. 
(6)  A current list of all its officers and directors, including addresses and telephone numbers. 
(7)  A list of all pertinent agreements or contracts, including pole use agreements, entered into by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business under a franchise granted hereunder; actual copies of contracts shall be supplied upon request. 
(8)  The names and both business and residential addresses and phone numbers of the franchisee's resident manager, engineer and/or consultant. 
(9)  Copies of all rules and regulations promulgated by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business. 
(b)  The grantee shall file quarterly with the city, within forty-five (45) days of the end of each quarter, the following: 
(1)  Quarterly financial statements containing the same information required for annual financial statements under subsection (a)(2) above which shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis and shall be accompanied by a certificate of the grantee's chief financial officer attesting to their completeness and accuracy. 
(2)  A list of all complaints and CATV system down time received or experienced during the quarter. Such list shall also include complaint disposition and response time. For the purpose of this paragraph, certified copies of a complaint logbook reflecting all such incidents will suffice. The city shall have the right to review this complaint book at any time during the period. 
(c)  All such reports and records shall be available for inspection by the public at the city clerk's office, and such other locations as the city administrator may designate. 
(d)  Each grantee shall simultaneously file with the city administrator a copy of each petition, application and communication transmitted by the grantee to, or received by the grantee from, any federal, state, local or other regulatory commissions or agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over any matters affecting cable television. 
Section 21.3.15 - Right of Grantees to Use Poles and Other Equipment of Public Utilities. 
(a)  There is hereby granted the further nonexclusive right, privilege, and authority to grantees, as defined herein, to lease, rent, or in any other manner obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment, and facilities from any and all holders of public licenses and franchises within the incorporated area of the city including, but not limited to, BellSouth and the Georgia Power Company, and to use these towers, poles, lines, cables, and other equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the city. The poles used by grantees, other than those owned by grantees, shall be those erected and maintained by existing public utility systems or those owned by the city, when and where practicable, provided mutually satisfactory agreements can be entered into with these companies and with the city by separate agreements. 
(b)  Grantees shall provide and keep current a map of the city showing the exact type, style, and location of any and all lines, poles, and other fixtures of grantees within the unincorporated area. 
(c)  Grantees shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system, provided written prior approval is obtained in these instances from the director of transportation. 
(2001, Renumbered, 09/04/2001, Correct reinsertion of section.) 
Section 21.3.16 - Requirements for Towers, Poles, Wires, and Appurtenances. 
(a)  Grantees' transmission and distribution system towers, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected, and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the city may deem proper to make, or to hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other public property; removal of any equipment to avoid interference shall be done promptly upon receiving written request to do so from the city, or its designated official; and will be at grantee's expense. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance of the transmission and distribution system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association and any applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Roswell affecting electrical installations, which may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances. 
(c)  All installations of equipment shall be of permanent nature, durable, and installed in accordance with good engineering practices, and shall comply with all existing city regulations, ordinances, and state laws so as not to interfere in any manner with the right of the public or individual property owner, and shall not interfere with the travel and use of public places by the public and during the construction, repair, or removal thereof, shall not obstruct or impede traffic. Further, said construction shall be subject to inspection by the city. 
(d)  No poles are to be erected upon the streets, and no excavation of any type shall be done or caused to be done upon the streets unless a permit is first obtained from the city. 
(e)  If any grantees' cables or wires are installed on existing aboveground systems which are placed underground at any future date, at no expense to the city, the grantee shall likewise place their cables or wires underground. 
(f)  In the event that a change is made in the grade, width, or location of public streets, alleys, avenues, and grounds by authority of the city, which shall necessitate the removal of any poles, wires, and transmission and distribution lines to conform to the change of grade, the grantee shall make the necessary changes in their lines, at their own expense, upon due notice from the city. 
(g)  In the maintenance and operation of their television transmission and distribution system in the streets, alleys, and other public places, and in the course of any new construction or addition to their facilities, the grantees shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by grantees in the course of their operations shall be made only after having obtained prior written permission from the city to do so, and shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate barriers, fences, or barrels, the bounds of which, during periods of dusk and darkness, shall be clearly designated by warning lights. 
(h)  All work in any way necessitated by the business of grantees which may involve the opening, breaking up, or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk, or other part of any city-owned or city-controlled property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the city, and shall, at the option of the city, be done by the city, and the city shall be reimbursed by the grantee for the reasonable costs of the work. Nothing herein shall be construed as a requirement that the city conduct an excavation or repair on behalf of or as agents for grantees. 
(i)  Grantees shall, at their expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate on the same street, alley, or public place, or remove from the street, alley, or public place, any property of grantees when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street excavation, freeway and bridge construction, change of establishments of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or other structures of public improvement; provided, however, that grantees shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of grantees in place as provided in section 21.3.23 hereof. 
(j)  Where located within the right-of-way of public streets, highways, alleys or other thoroughfares, the grantee's towers, poles, wires, and appurtenances shall be placed at such location within the right-of-way as is designated from time to time by the city transportation department. 
(k)  No work within the right-of-way shall be commenced until a permit to perform the work shall have been applied for and granted by the transportation department of the city. Requests for permits to work upon the road rights-of-way must be filed with said department not less than twenty-one days prior to the time that the work is scheduled to commence. Applications for permits to perform work within a street right-of-way must be filed in the name of the grantee, who shall at all times be responsible for the proper performance of the work that is scheduled. The application shall be upon such form as customarily used or accepted by the city with respect to public utilities seeking permission to work within a street right-of-way. The application shall be accompanied by maps, prints, or drawings showing the nature of the work to be done, the location of the work, the anticipated beginning and ending dates of the work, the location of all public utilities and improvements within the right-of-way involved, and how the same will be affected by the grantee's proposed work, a general description of the proposed work, and such other information as the transportation department reasonably deems necessary before the granting of the requested permit. 
(l)  Each grantee may trim trees overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city arborist and at the expense of the grantee. 
(m)  When performing any work within or adjacent to any public right-of-way, a grantee shall take all reasonable precautions to protect the public, and erect such warning devices as shall be reasonably calculated to apprise the public of the presence of the work and the activities being undertaken. 
(n)  The granting of any permit to a grantee to perform work within or adjacent to public right-of-way shall not in any instance constitute an acceptance by the city of any responsibility for the activities of a grantee. 
Section 21.3.17 - Joint Use of Poles to be Granted City. 
Grantees shall grant to the city, free of expense, joint use of any and all poles owned by them for any proper municipal purpose, insofar as it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the grantees' own wires and fixtures. Proper regard shall be given to all existing safety rules covering construction and maintenance in effect at the time of construction. If, in accommodating the city's joint use of their poles, grantees are required to change or replace poles or install new poles, the city shall compensate grantees for such additional expense. 
Section 21.3.18 - Insurance Requirements. 
(a)  Specifications. Throughout the term of this agreement, the company shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain a liability insurance policy or policies, in a form acceptable to the franchising authority, together with evidence acceptable to the franchising authority demonstrating that the premiums for said policy or policies have been paid. Such policy or policies shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Georgia. Such companies must carry a rating by A.M. Best of not less than "A". Such policy or policies shall insure (a) the company and (b) the franchising authority and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) against each and every form of liability of the company referred to in this agreement in the minimum combined amount of $2,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit the company from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations, provided that the franchising authority, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by the company. 
(b)  Workers' Compensation. The company shall ensure its compliance with the Georgia Workers' Compensation Act and in that regard shall secure insurance to cover its obligations with respect to workers' compensation claims, or take other appropriate steps, which insurance and steps shall be in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the franchising authority. The company shall indemnify and hold harmless the franchising authority from any workers' compensation claims to which the company may become subject during the term of this agreement. 
(c)  Maintenance. The liability insurance policies required by this section 21.3.18 shall be maintained by the company throughout the term of this agreement and such other period of time during which the company operates or is engaged in the removal of the system. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until ninety (90) days after receipt by the franchising authority, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew" and in no event later than sixty (60) days prior to said cancellation, the company shall obtain and furnish to the franchising authority replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to the franchising authority. 
(d)  Increased Insurance Coverage. In the event of any changed circumstances following the effective date, the franchising authority may, after consulting with the company and mutual agreement reached, alter the minimum limitation of the liability insurance policy or policies required in this section 21.3.18. 
(e)  Indemnification. Through the foregoing contracts, the grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including, but not limited to, damages to city property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever including, but not limited to, damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost, and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise granted hereunder. Provided that the grantee shall not be liable for any damages, fees or expenses where any lawsuit is based on the actions or omissions of the city but not on any act or omission by the grantee. 
(f)  Liability Not Limited. The legal liability of the company and any affiliated person to the franchising authority and any person for any of the matters which are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this article including, without limitation, the company's indemnification obligations set forth in this ordinance, shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by the company. 
Section 21.3.19 - Franchise Fee. 
(a)  State Franchise. Per O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq., "Consumer Choice for Television Act", as may be amended from time to time, a franchise fee of five (5) percent shall be required for all cable or video service providers doing business within the city under a State of Georgia franchise. The payment by the provider shall be in lieu of any applicable tax, license, fee, surcharge, or other assessment for or with respect to the use of any public right-of-way. Said franchise fee paid shall further be in lieu of any permit fee, encroachment fee, degradation fee or other fee that may otherwise be assessed for occupation or work within the public right-of-way; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall limit the city's authority to impose ad valorem taxes, sales taxes or other taxes lawfully enacted. All cable or video service providers shall provide notice to the City of Roswell of any intent to work within the City of Roswell at least ten (10) days prior to the start date of such work and shall be subject to all federal, state and city codes, ordinances and regulations concerning excavation, permitting (other than payment of fees), bonding requirements, indemnification requirements and placement and maintenance of facilities requirements except as specifically precluded by O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6(b). All cable and video service providers shall further be subject to any lawful and reasonable future exercise of the city's police powers to the extent necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(b)  City Franchise. Upon renewal or initial grant of a franchise, each grantee shall pay the franchise fee hereinafter set forth, in addition to the filing fee. For the rights granted hereunder, the grantee shall pay to the city at the time hereinafter specified and subject to the terms of section 21.3.25 hereof, a franchise fee equal to five (5) percent of the monthly total gross revenues of its cable or video service within the city unless a lesser amount is agreed to by the mayor and council within the franchise agreement. Said franchise fee may be lowered only for considerations provided for by a cable or video provider within said franchise agreement that are estimated to be equal to or greater than said reduction in franchise fee. This payment by the grantee to the city shall be in lieu of any applicable occupation tax, license tax, or other similar levy, and shall be paid quarterly. Nothing herein contained, however, shall in any way relieve the grantee or its assigns or successors from the obligation of paying any property taxes to the City of Roswell or any other governmental subdivision of the State of Georgia or any other taxes lawfully levied by the State of Georgia on the operation of grantees. Grantees shall file with the city administrator, within ninety (90) days after the expiration of any calendar year during the term of the rights granted hereunder, a statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing the gross revenues as defined herein. It shall be the duty of the grantees to pay to the city within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing these statements, any unpaid balance for the calendar year covered by the statement. In any year or portions thereof, during which payments under this section amount to less than $200.00 per month, the grantees shall pay the city the minimum amount of $200.00 per month, the payments to commence immediately upon the adoption and approval of this article and grant of a franchise hereunder. 
(2007-09-14, Amended, 09-05-07) 
Section 21.3.20 - Sale, Assignment or Transfer of Rights Granted to Grantees. 
Any sale, assignment, or transfer of the rights hereunder shall be made only with the prior consent of the mayor and council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld in conformance with federal law. Furthermore, any change in control of the company after the effective date shall be made only with express written consent of the mayor and council which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The proposed transferee, assignee or controlling entity must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the mayor and council and must agree to comply with all the provisions of this article, and provided, further, that no consent shall be required for a transfer by trust deed, deed to secure debt, or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
Section 21.3.21 - Grantees Subject to Laws, Regulations, and Ordinances. 
Each grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its CATV system in a manner consistent with this article, the franchise agreement, FCC technical standards and all requirements of the city ordinances, rules, regulations, and specifications including, but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a street, and other street work. 
Section 21.3.22 - Rights Reserved to City. 
There is hereby reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any state statute or ordinance of the city, and grantees, by their acceptance of the rights granted hereunder, agree to be bound thereby, and to comply with any action or requirement of the city in its exercise of any right or power. Further, the rights granted hereunder shall not preclude the city from granting to any other person a right to provide similar services in the city. 
Section 21.3.23 - Abandonment of Property by Grantees. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the system should cease for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event the system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this article, or the rights granted hereunder have been terminated, cancelled, or have expired due to an event of default or otherwise, grantees shall promptly remove from the streets and public places all property and poles of the system, other than any which the city may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of this removal, grantees shall promptly restore the street or other area from which the property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the city. 
(b)  Any property of grantees to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the city may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of grantees in place, grantees shall submit to the city an instrument to be approved by the city, transferring to the city the ownership of the property. 
Section 21.3.24 - Failure of Grantee to Complete Required Street Work. 
Upon failure of grantees to complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article to be done in any street, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may cause this work to be done, and grantees shall pay the city the cost thereof in the itemized amount reported to grantees within thirty (30) days after receipt of the itemized report. 
Section 21.3.25 - Term and Renewal. 
The term for which each franchise is granted as provided herein shall be specified in the franchise agreement. A grantee may file an application for a renewal of a franchise at the end of the initial term and at the end of any subsequent renewal of the franchise as provided herein. Procedures for renewal of any existing CATV franchise shall be governed by the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. § 546). A grantee shall be required to submit a $1,000.00 processing fee with its application for renewal of a franchise. Upon receiving an application for renewal, the mayor and council shall consider a grantee's legal, technical, character, financial, and public interest qualities in light of the grantee's past performance under its franchise. The application for renewal shall be granted by the city if the city determines that the grantee is satisfying the obligations imposed upon it by the terms and conditions of this article and is otherwise in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the FCC. 
Section 21.3.26 - Performance Bond and Deposit. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, franchisee shall deposit with the City Administrator of Roswell a performance bond from a surety acceptable to the city attorney in the minimum amount of $50,000.00. The form and content of such performance bond shall be approved by the city and shall contain a provision that the issuer of such performance bond can rely absolutely on the demand of the city upon said performance bond. The performance bond shall be used to ensure the faithful performance by franchisee of all provisions of this agreement; compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this franchise; and the payment by franchisee of any claims, liens, and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. In the alternative, and under the same provisions as above, franchisee may furnish a letter of credit in the aforestated amount, in a form issued by a financial institution approved by the city. 
Section 21.3.27 - Force and Effect of Article. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or void, all other sections thereof not so held shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
Section 21.3.28 - Limitations on Rights, Privileges, or Exemptions Granted. 
No privilege, right, or exemption shall be granted or conferred under this article except those specifically prescribed herein. No grantee shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this article or a franchise agreement by any failure of the city to insist upon or to seek compliance with any terms or conditions. 
Section 21.3.29 - Foreclosure or Other Judicial Sale. 
(a)  Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the system located in the City of Roswell, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the city administrator of this fact, and this notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of section 21.3.20 hereof, governing the consent of the city to transfer the system, shall apply. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to cancel this franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or other action or proceeding, unless the receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless: 
(1)  Within one hundred twenty (120) days after his election or appointment, the receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this article and remedied all defaults thereunder; and, 
(2)  The receiver or trustee, within one hundred twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this article and the franchise granted to the grantee. 
Section 21.3.30 - Cancellation of Franchise. 
(a)  In addition to any other provision for the cancellation of a franchise set out herein or in a duly executed franchise agreement, the city may terminate a franchise in the event of the willful failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained herein, or any material rule or regulation of the mayor and council or city administrator subject to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(b)  The city administrator may make written demand that the grantee do or comply with any requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule, or regulation. If the failure, refusal, or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following the written demand, the city administrator may place his request for termination of the franchise upon the next regular meeting agenda of the mayor and council. The city administrator shall cause to be served upon the grantee at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting of the mayor and council, a written notice of his intent to request termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published at least once ten (10) days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall consider the request of the city administrator, shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall determine, in their discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. If the failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the mayor and council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon any terms and conditions as are reasonable. 
(d)  If the mayor and council shall determine the failure, refusal, or neglect by the grantee without just cause, then the mayor and council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within any period as the mayor and council may fix. 
(e)  The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the city under the franchise or any provision of law. 
Section 21.3.31 - Purchase of System upon Cancellation, Termination, or Expiration of Franchise. 
(a)  Upon the cancellation, termination, or expiration of a franchise, the city shall have the right to purchase the CATV system within the municipal boundaries in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the city may direct the grantee to cease operation of the CATV system. If the city elects to purchase the CATV system, the grantee shall promptly execute all appropriate documents to transfer title to the city, and shall assign all other contracts, leases, licenses, permits, and any other rights necessary to maintain continuity of service to the public. The grantee shall cooperate with the city or with another person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity authorized or directed by the city to operate the CATV system for a temporary period in maintaining continuity of service. Nothing herein is intended as a waiver of any other rights the city may have. 
(b)  If a franchise: 
(1)  Is cancelled or terminated by the city as provided for in this article, the purchase price to the city for the CATV system shall be its then book value (i.e., cost less accumulated depreciation) according to generally accepted accounting principles with a reduction for any damages incurred by the city in connection with the cancellation. The book value, if not agreed upon, shall be determined by arbitration pursuant to section 21.3.32 of this article, but shall not include any valuation based upon the franchise. Damages incurred by the city shall include, without limitation, any payments made by the city to another person, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity, for the operation of the system for a temporary period until a franchise is granted. 
(2)  Terminates by expiration of its terms, the purchase price to the city for the CATV system shall be its then fair market value of the CATV system as of the date of expiration of the term of its franchise. The fair market value shall be the fair market value of all tangible and intangible property forming part of the CATV system, but shall not include any valuation based upon the franchise. The fair market value, if not agreed upon, shall be determined by arbitration pursuant to section 21.3.32 hereof. 
(c)  Upon cancellation, termination, or expiration of a franchise, the city may direct the grantee to operate the CATV system for the account of the city for a period of six (6) months. The city shall pay the grantee all reasonable and necessary costs incurred by it for the operation of the CATV system during this period. 
Section 21.3.32 - Arbitration. 
Matters which are expressly made arbitrable under provisions of this article or a franchise agreement shall be determined by a panel of three (3) arbitrators. One (1) arbitrator shall be appointed by the city, one (1) by the grantee, and the third by the arbitrators already selected. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in any manner as the arbitrators may provide in their award, but in no event shall the city be obligated for more than one-half (½) of the expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. 
Section 21.3.33 - Renegotiation. 
(a)  Upon written notice given by the city or grantee, one to the other, not less than six (6) months prior to the fifth and tenth anniversaries of the date of execution of a franchise agreement, the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement may be modified, provided that both the city and the grantee are agreeable to the modification. Modification shall be directed toward effecting alterations in the terms and conditions to reflect those technical, legal and economic changes that have occurred during the interim period. 
(b)  Any changes in the franchise agreement necessitated by modification to the Federal Communications Commission regulations shall be incorporated into the franchise agreement within the time limit provided for in the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission then in force and effect. 
Section 21.3.34 - Emergency Alert. 
The system shall include an emergency alert capability which will permit the director of emergency management or his designee to override, by remote control, the video and/or audio of all channels simultaneously except those involved in retransmission of television broadcast programming in the case of public emergencies. 
Section 21.3.35 - Satellite Subscription Television System. 
(a)  Definitions. Satellite subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish type system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals. 
(b)  Business license restrictions. A business license to operate a satellite subscription television system shall only be issued to provide service to one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate such system does not cross adjacent non-owned property lines and does not cross city rights-of-way. 
(c)  Application of section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person, firm, or corporation that is franchised by the mayor and council to own and operate a cable television system under sections 21.3.1 through 21.3.34 of this article. 
(d)  Business license required. No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, operate or service a satellite subscription television system within the City of Roswell without first obtaining a business license to carry on said business. 
Section 21.3.36 - Basic Service Rates and Charges. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the companies and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchises. 
(b)  In connection with such regulations, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The city administrator, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
Section 21.3.37 - Bundling of Services. 
If a grantee offers multiple services other than cable television to a subscriber for a flat fee or reduced package price, the grantee shall designate a portion of such fee or package price for CATV in an amount no less than ninety (90) percent of the amount charged for comparable cable services offered without bundling of service. Such apportionment shall be reflected in the franchise fee report required pursuant to section 21.3.14. 
Article 21.4 - [Clean Power Utilities Pole Policy] 

Sec. 21.4.1 - [Underground Utility Services.] 
Where utility services have been placed underground by agreement, no other above ground services may be added to any utility pole covered by the agreement and which displays the notice set out in section 21.4.2 below. 
( Ord. No. 2014-11-12, 11/24/2014 ) 
Sec. 21.4.2 - [Labeling.] 
Utility poles covered by an agreement as set out in section 21.4.1 shall be labeled by the utility to have "No Wires" and shall make reference to Roswell Code of Ordinances sections 21.4.1 et seq. in order to maintain the normal operation of the utility and not interfere with the use of any portion of the municipal street system, but also to provide convenient notice to utilities that placement of additional wires and or services on such poles is in violation of City of Roswell ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 2014-11-12, 11/24/2014 ) 
Sec. 21.4.3 - [Intent of Labeling.] 
The intent of labeling will be to provide notice that agreements have been made for such services to be placed underground and all other utilities shall henceforth be so placed as per the adopted standards and ordinances of the City of Roswell. 
( Ord. No. 2014-11-12, 11/24/2014 ) 
Chapter 22 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES 
Article 22.1 - Traffic Control 

Sec. 22.1.1 - Adoption of State and Federal Regulations. 
For the purpose of regulating vehicles and traffic in the city, there is hereby adopted the following state and federal regulations: 
1.  O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376 the "Uniform Rules of the Road;" 
2.  O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-140—40-5-159, "Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act;" 
3.  Parts 382, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395, 396, and 397 of Title 49 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, "The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986;" and 
4.  The Federal "Out of Service" Criteria as amended from time to time. 
These provisions are adopted as fully as if set out at length herein. 
Any ordinance and/or part of this chapter of the Code of Roswell which specifically designates the speed limits on the public streets of Roswell and/or which designates one-way streets are not affected by the adoption of the "Uniform Rules of the Road." All speed limits set forth in this chapter and/or by specific ordinance remain in effect unless specifically changed by ordinance. The speed limit will be posted on all streets in Roswell. 
(2001-09-01, Amended, 09/05/2001) 
State Law reference— Local powers with respect to the uniform rules of the road are provided in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 
Section 22.1.2 - Reckless or Negligent Driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any automobile, motor vehicle, motorcycle, truck, tractor or horse-drawn vehicle, or bicycle upon the streets, roads, lanes, alleys and public places within the city with a reckless or negligent disregard of traffic conditions then existing, the rights of others, and the safety of the public. 
Section 22.1.3 - Funeral Processions. 
Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided such vehicles shall identify themselves by burning regular headlights and shall keep in close formation. When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
Section 22.1.4 - Maximum Speed Limits Established. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed greater than that designated in this section. 
(b)  Except as specifically prescribed in this section or in chapter 14 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell, speeds shall not exceed twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any public street. 
(c)  The city council may designate any residential street within the City of Roswell as "designated residential zone" as is defined and permitted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-14-8(b). 
(d)  The speed limits for those streets on which speed detection devices are permitted under provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-14-3 are set forth in the appendix to this chapter. 
Section 22.1.5 - Speed Limits on Certain Streets and Speed Detection Devices Permitted. 
Speed limits enumerated. The maximum speed limit on the public streets or parts of the public streets are set forth in an appendix to this chapter and incorporated herein. Speed detection devices are authorized to be used on the streets listed in such appendix. 
Section 22.1.6 - Penalty for Violation of this Chapter. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or the regulations adopted in this chapter, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1.1.3. 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. provide for a uniform traffic citation and complaint form, traffic violations bureaus, and procedures for arrests, trials and appeals. 
Article 22.2 - Truck Routes 

Section 22.2.1 - Street Routes for Certain Vehicles. 
All motor vehicles having a gross vehicular weight rating (G.V.W.R.) in excess of thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds or having an overall length in excess of thirty (30) feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the city except those authorized and designated as truck routes by this article. Provided, however, that when the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, place of pickup or delivery of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, place of pickup or delivery and the nearest designated truck route. 
(2002-11-03, Amended, 11/18/2002) 
Section 22.2.2 - Limited Load Streets, Bridges and Culverts. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the city where the weight of such vehicle with or without load is in excess of the weight as limited by ordinance and where signs indicating such limitations are posted. Further, it shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle over a bridge or culvert in the city over the weight capacity shown on said bridge and/or culvert. The driver and/or owner shall be liable to the city for any damages caused by driving an overweight vehicle over any street, bridge and/or culvert so marked. This civil liability is in addition to any fine or punishment that may be assessed for violation of this article. 
Section 22.2.3 - Inspection of Restricted Vehicles. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in section 22.2.1, when upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
Section 22.2.4 - Temporary Truck Routes. 
If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles as herein defined shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the city. 
Section 22.2.5 - Designated Truck Routes. 
A.  The following routes are designated as truck routes: 
1.  Woodstock Road/Crossville Road (S.R. 92) from city limit at Cobb County Line to Alpharetta Highway (S.R. 9). 
2.  Holcomb Bridge Road (S.R. 140) from Alpharetta Highway to city limit at Gwinnett County Line. 
3.  Marietta Highway (S.R. 120) from city limit at Cobb County Line to Atlanta Street (S.R. 9). 
4.  Houze Road (S.R. 140) from city limit at 370 feet north of Rucker Road to Mansell Road. 
5.  Atlanta Street/Alpharetta Street/Alpharetta Highway (S.R. 9) from city limit at Chattahoochee River to city limit at Upper Hembree Road. 
6.  Georgia Highway 400 from city limit at Chattahoochee River to city limit, just south of Mansell Road. 
7.  Hembree Road from city limit at Cooperative Way to Alpharetta Highway (S.R. 9). 
8.  Mansell Road from city limit at Westside Parkway/Old Roswell Road to. Crossville Road (S.R. 92). 
9.  Mansell Road from city limit at Big Creek, east for two thousand one hundred (2,100) feet. 
10.  Old Alabama Road from city limit at one thousand forty-four (1,044) feet east of Woodfall Drive to Holcomb Bridge Road (S.R. 140). 
11.  Old Alabama Road Connector from city limit at two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet south of Mansell Road to Old Alabama Road. 
12.  Wills Road from city limit at Alpharetta Highway (S.R. 9) to Old Roswell Road. 
13.  Nesbit Ferry Road from city limit at six hundred (600) feet north of Nesbit Lakes Drive to Holcomb Bridge Road (S.R. 140). 
14.  Houze Way from Alpharetta Hwy. (S.R. 9) to Houze Road (S.R. 140). 
15.  Holcomb Woods Parkway from Holcomb Bridge Road (S.R. 140) to Old Alabama Road. 
16.  Commerce Parkway from Alpharetta Highway (S.R. 9) to Old Roswell Road. 
17.  Old Roswell Road from Commerce Parkway to Holcomb Bridge Road (S.R. 140). 
18.  Old Roswell Road from Westside Parkway to Hembree Road. 
19.  Arnold Mill Road (S.R. 140) from city limit at two hundred ninety-five (295) feet north of Edenwild Drive to Crabapple Road. 
B.  The foregoing routes shall be designated by the R 14-1 truck route sign as depicted in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition. 
(2010-03-07, § 1, Amended, 03/15/2010; 2002-11-03, Amended, 11/18/2002) 
Section 22.2.6 - Penalty. 
Violation of any of the sections of this article or any part thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
Article 22.3 - Parking Restrictions 

Section 22.3.1 - "Park" or "Parking" Defined. 
As used in this article, the terms "park" or "parking" shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether accompanied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers. 
Section 22.3.2 - Authority of the Chief of Police to Promulgate Parking Regulations. 
The chief of police may impose a limited parking time or prohibit parking on any street or portion thereof whenever the traffic conditions or safety warrants such. The transportation department shall designate the parking limitation by placing a sign on the street or portions of streets affected. 
Section 22.3.3 - Removal of Vehicles Parked in Violation of this Article. 
If any person violates this article, any sworn police or code enforcement official upon determination that the violation impedes traffic or the safety of others, may have the vehicle involved removed by a private contractor, and the owner of the vehicle shall pay the towing fee and storage fees connected therewith. 
Section 22.3.4 - Restrictions on Parking Commercial or Oversize Vehicles, Campers, Boats, Etc. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck or other freight or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of eight-ton gross vehicle weight upon any street within the corporate limits of the city for a period longer than six (6) hours, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(b)  No person shall stop or stand any commercial vehicle, truck or bus with a body more than either eight (8) feet wide or ten (10) feet high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
Section 22.3.5 - Authority of Director of Transportation and Chief of Police to Erect Traffic Regulatory Devices. 
The director of transportation, with the written concurrence of the chief of police, and pursuant to existing traffic ordinances, may approve the placement of regulatory traffic control devices, as defined by the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), which is hereby adopted and incorporated as though fully set out herein, whenever and wherever traffic conditions or safety warrant such devices on city-owned streets. The transportation department will study, keep records, install, and maintain all such devices. 
(2012-03-03, § 1, Added, 03/12/2012) 
Section 22.3.6 - Penalty for Violation of this Article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be punished in accordance with section 1.1.3 of this Code of Ordinances; provided further, any cost the city sustains in having a vehicle in violation of this article removed shall be added to the court costs. 
Article 22.4 - Motor Vehicles—Operation and Maintenance 

Section 22.4.1 - Abandoned Motor Vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or abandon a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city or upon the rights-of-way of the streets and allow said motor vehicle to remain parked or abandoned for more than twelve (12) continuous hours. Parking on the street shall not impede safe travel of vehicles or emergency access. 
State Law reference— Under O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, a local government may provide by ordinance for the removal and disposal of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2015-04-08, § 1, 04/27/2015 ) 
Section 22.4.2 - Removal and Storage. 
Should any sworn police officer or code enforcement officer of the city find any motor vehicle that has been parked or abandoned as aforesaid, he shall have the right to impound same and to have same removed from the streets of the city at the expense of the owner, and charge the owner storage. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-09, § 4, 08/04/2008) 
Section 22.4.3 - Inoperable Motor Vehicle. 
As used in this section, "inoperable motor vehicle," shall mean any contrivance or part thereof, propelled by power and used in the transportation of persons or property on public streets and highways, the condition of which is one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Wrecked; 
(b)  Dismantled; 
(c)  Partially dismantled; 
(d)  Inoperative; 
(e)  Abandoned; 
(f)  Discarded. 
Section 22.4.4 - Declared to be Unlawful and a Nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any inoperable motor vehicle on public property or any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city. The presence of any inoperable vehicle on any property shall be deemed a public nuisance except as otherwise stated in this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another, including public property, or to permit or allow inoperable vehicles to be parked or maintained on his or its own property. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business; or 
(3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the Unified Development Code (UDC) of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014) 
Section 22.4.5 - Administration and Enforcement of this Article; Right of Entry. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this article, the chief of police or any duly authorized sworn officers may enter upon the private or public property to examine a junked motor vehicle or obtain information as to the identity of a junked vehicle and to remove or cause to be removed the junked motor vehicle constituting a nuisance under this article. 
Section 22.4.6 - Notice to Abate Nuisance; Violation. 
When the chief of police, a sworn officer or code enforcement officer deems a junked motor vehicle to be a public nuisance, he shall issue a warning notice to the parties owning or in apparent possession of the motor vehicle to remove the junked motor vehicle. If the junked motor vehicle is not removed within seventy-two (72) hours, the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or owner of the land on which it is located shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1.1.3 and the cost of having the junked vehicle removed shall be added to the court costs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08-09, § 5, 08/04/2008) 
Section 22.4.7 - Right of Entry of Persons Employed to Remove Vehicles. 
Any person employed by the city to remove junked motor vehicles constituting a nuisance under this article has the right to enter upon private and public property to remove a junked motor vehicle. 
Section 22.4.8 - Unnecessary Noise. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive: 
(a)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; 
(b)  The creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; 
(c)  The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; 
(d)  The use or any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
Section 22.4.9 - Vehicles to be Covered. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or its agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste articles, concrete, asphalt or thing of substance, whether liquid or solid, unless such is in a closed container or vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in the municipality; provided, however, that the requirements herein for covering such vehicles shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches, logs and similar waste material, if such vehicle is so constructed that such waste material will not be spilled on the street, and/or if the matter is securely lashed to such vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping as aforesaid. 
Section 22.4.10 - Restrictions on Ready-Mix Concrete Trucks. 
(a)  In addition to those prohibitions listed in section 22.4.9, it shall be unlawful to operate any ready-mix concrete truck along the public roads within the city unless such truck is equipped with a chute enclosure, or some other mechanism, which precludes the leakage of concrete and other debris from leaking or escaping from the truck while traveling through or within the city. For purposes of this section, truck is defined to mean any vehicle with two (2) or more axles used primarily for the purpose of transporting materials and products. 
(b)  The chute enclosure must meet the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The device must be one hundred (100) percent effective in keeping debris from coming out of the chute when the device is engaged; 
(2)  The device must be rigid, open and close, and lock and unlock automatically when the flop chute is lowered or raised; 
(3)  The device shall have no parts which may become clogged with concrete; 
(4)  The device must close the chute at the end and seal it completely. No debris shall be able to escape and fall from the chute while the truck is traveling; 
(5)  The device shall be coated with a reflective paint, tape, or logo so that it is clearly visible at night; 
(6)  The device shall be permanently attached to the chute of each truck. 
Section 22.4.11 - Reserved. 
Section 22.4.12 - Penalty. 
Any person who operates a vehicle in violation of this article or who abandons or fails to properly maintain a vehicle shall be punished in accordance with section 1.1.3 of this Code of Ordinances in addition to any penalty set forth herein. 
Article 22.5 - Vehicles for Hire—Taxis 

Section 22.5.1 - Definition. 
Taxicab means a motor vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for compensation in the city and not operated on a fixed route. The term "taxicab" shall not include limousines regulated by the state public service commission. 
Section 22.5.2 - Permits Required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in the business of operating or the operation of a taxicab in the City of Roswell without first having secured a taxicab permit. 
Section 22.5.3 - Classes of Permits. 
There shall be three (3) classes of permits required under this article: 
(a)  Company permit. This permit applies to persons, firms, partnerships, corporations or other entities engaged in the business of operating a taxicab in the City of Roswell and which are subject to an occupation tax under Article 10.3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Roswell. 
(b)  Resident operator's permit. This permit applies to any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the city and who is operating under the auspices of a company permit. 
(c)  Non-resident operator's permit. This permit applies to any person operating a taxicab on the streets of the city who is not operating under the auspices of a company subject to an occupation tax in the City of Roswell. A non-resident operator is subject to the same requirements as a resident operator. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003, (c)) 
Section 22.5.4 - Company Permit. 
An applicant for a company permit shall provide certain information on a form provided by the city, and submit to a background investigation. 
An applicant must: 
(a)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age; and 
(b)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment authorized by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; and 
(c)  Hold an occupation tax certificate issued by the city; and 
(d)  Be available to provide taxi service twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days a week; and 
(e)  Maintain a dispatch office within the city, staffed twenty-four (24) hours a day by company employees, for the purpose of dispatching all company vehicles; and 
(f)  Provide proof of insurance as required in this article. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003) 
Section 22.5.5 - Convictions Disqualifying Applicant for a Company Permit. 
No permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses: 
(a)  Manslaughter, or negligent homicide, resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs, in the last five (5) years. 
(c)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. 
(d)  Failure to stop and render aid or leaving the scene of an accident, as required under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statements under oath in connection with this "application for permit". 
(f)  Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statements under oath relating to the ownership or operation of motor vehicles. 
(g)  Convictions or forfeiture of bail on three (3) charges of a violation of the motor vehicle laws of the State of Georgia within twenty-four (24) months of the application date. 
(h)  The violation of any law involving moral turpitude. 
(i)  Repeated violation of the city ordinances, county laws, or state laws, which affect the safety of human life or limb on the streets of the City of Roswell. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003, (g) amended) 
Section 22.5.6 - Insurance Required. 
No owner of a taxicab shall operate or authorize any other person to operate a taxicab in the City of Roswell unless it is covered by a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which provides the following minimum coverage: 
$25,000.00 - for injury to or death of one (1) person in one (1) accident; 
$50,000.00 - for injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident; and 
$25,000.00 - for injury to or destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident. 
Each taxicab operated within the city limits shall be required to carry and maintain in effect this minimum insurance coverage. Proof of such insurance coverage including the name of issuing company, the amounts of coverage provided, and the policy number shall be provided to the city before a permit shall issue. Such insurance shall provide specific coverage for the vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. Failure to maintain such coverage shall constitute cause for revocation of a city permit. 
(2006-10-20, Amended, 10/02/2006; 2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003) 
Section 22.5.7 - Drivers Qualifications for Resident and Non-Resident Operator's Permit. 
(a)  Before operating a taxicab within the City of Roswell, a driver shall: 
(1)  Possess a valid Class C Georgia driver's license; and 
(2)  Be competent to operate a motor vehicle; and 
(3)  Be familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances of the City of Roswell; and 
(4)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the chief of police or his designee to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; and 
(5)  Provide a current motor vehicle report (driver's history report) at the time of original application and at renewal time; and 
(6)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation; and 
(7)  Possess an operator's permit issued by the city. 
(b)  Conditions which shall result in the denial of an operator's permit are as follows: 
(1)  A conviction of a felony, unless ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of completion of felony sentence; 
(2)  A conviction of a crime of moral turpitude within past ten (10) years; 
(3)  Classification as a habitual offender by the department of public safety within the previous five (5) years; 
(4)  A driver's license revoked by the department of public safety for violations within the previous five (5) years; 
(5)  A conviction of DUI (driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs) within the past five (5) years; 
(6)  A conviction for open container and/or transporting alcohol which is not the property of a fare; or 
(7)  A conviction of three (3) or more moving traffic violations within twenty-four (24) months of application date. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003; 2001-09-02, Amended, 09/05/2001, (a) amended) 
Section 22.5.8 - Taxicab Equipment. 
All taxicabs operating in the City of Roswell shall: 
(a)  Be equipped with a taximeter. Such taximeter shall be fastened in front of the passengers' seat and be visible to them at all times. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. It shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one (1) of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. The taximeter must be operational, turned on and in use for each fare. Log sheets of each fare are to be kept and made available to the city upon request. 
(b)  Be affixed with a vehicle permit sticker issued by the chief of police or his designee. Such stickers must at all times be displayed, fully visible and un-obscured in the upper right corner of the rear windshield. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker and that sticker shall not be used on any other vehicle. The sticker shall be renewed annually. 
(c)  Be plainly and prominently marked with the name and telephone number of the company which holds the city-issued permit. Such markings shall be affixed only by means of permanent vinyl lettering or paint. 
(d)  Be marked with rates on the side of the vehicle so as to be plainly visible to persons seeking to use the taxicab. 
(e)  Be equipped with a roof light that is permanently mounted on the roof of the vehicle, and maintained in good working order at all times. 
(f)  Be maintained in good, safe and serviceable mechanical condition as verified in a vehicle inspection form issued by the chief of police and signed by a technician at a company authorized and licensed to do business as an automotive service facility (such facility shall have a permanent location), and be in compliance with all county and state licensing and emission standards. 
(g)  Be maintained in a clean condition, free from foreign matter and offensive odors. 
(h)  Transport as passengers only the number of persons specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(i)  Taxicabs shall have a compartment for the secure storage of passengers' luggage that is separate and apart from the passenger compartment. 
(j)  No taxicab shall have less than three (3) doors, excluding the driver's door, for loading and unloading passengers. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003, (b), (e), (f) amended; (i) and (j) added; 2001-09-02, Amended, 09/05/2001, (a), (e), and (f) amended) 
Section 22.5.9 - Denial, Suspension and Revocation of Permit. 
(a)  An application for a permit or a permit issued under this article may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsection (c) hereof. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall furnish a permit holder a notice setting forth the time, place, and purpose of a meeting at which they intend to consider the revocation or suspension of a permit. After a hearing, if the mayor and council determine due cause exists, they may suspend, revoke or place the permit on probation, with or without conditions, for a maximum of twelve (12) months. 
(c)  A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article, and of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this article by the permit holder, its agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(5)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit. 
(6)  For transporting alcoholic beverage(s) that are not the property of a fare. 
(7)  Conviction of three (3) or more moving traffic violations within the preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(8)  Conviction of a felony. 
(9)  Conviction of reckless driving, or being in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(10)  Failure to deliver any property of value left in a vehicle to the City of Roswell Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(11)  Allowing a passenger to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion, or discharging a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge. 
(12)  Allowing a passenger to consume intoxicating substances or other controlled substances in the vehicle. 
(13)  Transporting a passenger to destination by a route that is not the safest or most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route. 
(14)  Picking up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger. 
(15)  Refusing to pick up as a passenger any person of proper deportment when the vehicle is available, or discriminate against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or mental or sensor handicap. 
(16)  Activating equipment indicating vehicle is in use when it is not, or failing to activate such equipment when the vehicle is in use. 
(17)  Engaging in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 
(18)  Having repeated violations of traffic law or ordinances, or of any ordinance provision regulating the conduct of taxicab drivers. 
(d)  Permit holders under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(e)  Permits issued under this article are not transferable. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003; 2001-09-02, Amended, 09/05/2001, additional of (6) under (c)) 
Section 22.5.10 - Regulatory Fee Required. 
A regulatory fee shall be required annually for each resident and non-resident taxicab company permit and an annual permit fee shall be required for each resident and non-resident operator's permit. Such fees will be set by the Public Safety and Public Works Committee and adopted by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(2008-01-01, Amended, 01/07/2008; 2007-03-03, Amended, 03/05/2007; 2006-10-20, Amended, 10/02/2006; 2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003) 
Section 22.5.11 - Notification of New Drivers. 
It shall be the duty of a company permit holder to notify the chief of police whenever a new driver is hired or terminated from employment. Failure to so notify can result in revocation of the permit. 
Section 22.5.12 - Unlawful Acts. 
A taxicab driver may be cited for any of the following unlawful acts: 
(a)  Transporting alcohol beverage(s) that are not the property of a fare; 
(b)  Failure to deliver any property of value left in a vehicle to the City of Roswell Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours; 
(c)  Allowing a passenger to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion, or discharging a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge; 
(d)  Allowing a passenger to consume, intoxicating substances, or other controlled substances in the vehicle; 
(e)  Transporting a passenger to destination by a route that is not the safest or most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route; 
(f)  Picking up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger; 
(g)  Refusing to pick up as a passenger any person of proper deportment when the vehicle is available, or discriminate against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or mental or sensor handicap; 
(h)  Activating equipment indicating vehicle is in use when it is not, or failing to activate such equipment when the vehicle is in use. 
(2003-11-24, Amended, 11/03/2003) 
Section 22.5.13 - Enforcement and Penalty. 
(a)  The police department and the code enforcement office shall enforce the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to six (6) months, or both. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the City of Roswell. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this article by any permit holder shall be due cause for revocation of any city permit or certificate, after notice and hearing before the mayor and council. 
Article 22.6 - Speed Limits Appendix[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-11-19 , § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed art. 22.6 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former art. 22.6, § 22.6.1 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-12-31 , § 1, adopted December 14, 2015. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 

Section 22.6.1 - City of Roswell, Georgia. 
Pursuant to Georgia Code 40, section 40.6.183, and section 40-6-376 the Uniform Rules of the Road Act, for local authorities to alter lawful speed limits, the following is part of an ordinance regulating speed limits within the City of Roswell, Georgia. 
LIST OF ROADWAYS for CITY OF ROSWELL 
ON-SYSTEM 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS EFFECTIVE***  A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after  commencement time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS EFFECTIVE***  A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after  commencement time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time -  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
( 2018-11-19 , § 1, Added, 11/26/2018) 
Article 22.7 - Golf Carts[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-05-09 , § 1, adopted May 11, 2015, repealed the former Art. 22.7, §§ 22.7.1—22.7.12, and enacted a new Art. 22.7 as set out herein. The former Art. 22.7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2008-09-13, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2008; Ord. No. 2014-12-13, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-02-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2015. 

Section 22.7.1 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
(a)  Personal transportation vehicle (to include golf carts meeting definition) means motor vehicle having not less than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground and unladen weight less than one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds which is designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour and any motor vehicle having no fewer than four (4) wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred seventy-five (1,375) pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than twenty (20) miles an hour. Such vehicles may also be referred to as 'motorized carts.' The term does not include mobility aids, including electric personal assistive mobility devices, power wheelchairs and scooters that can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle or multi-purpose off-highway vehicle. 
(b)  Driver's license means a valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued by the State of Georgia or any other state. 
(c)  Proof of insurance means documented (written) proof of liability insurance on the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) insuring against personal injury and damage to property of any nature relative to the operation of a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on designated city streets and roads in an amount not less than required by Georgia law for motor vehicles operated on public highways in the State of Georgia. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Amended 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.2 - Operation of Personal Transportation Vehicle (PTV). 
The City of Roswell adopts O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-330 through 40-6-369.1 and 40-6-371 "Standards for Operation of Personal Transportation Vehicles (PTV)." Provided all provisions of this article are followed, personal transportation vehicles as defined by O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 (43.1), also known as motorized carts, may be operated on public roads within the City of Roswell that have a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less or on multi-use paths designated by the mayor and city council by resolution, on designated golf cart paths and crossings, and within school zones as mayor and council may approve by resolution. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.3 - Operator. 
Only persons sixteen (16) years of age or older and holding a valid driver's license may operate a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on the above-described roads within the city. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.4 - Insurance Required. 
The operator or owner of a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) shall have written proof of insurance. Documentation of such coverage must be kept on the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) or carried by the person operating the personal transportation vehicle (PTV). 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.5 - Time of Operation, Equipment Requirements. 
(a)  A personal transportation vehicle (PTV) may be operated only during daylight hours between one-half (½) hour before sunrise and one-half (½) hour after sunset unless equipped with two (2) operating headlights, tail lights, and brake lights that are visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet. Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) shall not be operated at any time when there is insufficient light to clearly see persons or vehicles on the street or roadway at a distance of five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  A gasoline powered personal transportation vehicle (PTV) shall be equipped with factory installed safety systems, including indicator for gasoline or propane leaks, a speed governor and an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to, and including, the muffler(s) and exhaust pipe(s). 
(2)  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened. 
(3)  The engine of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(c)  Electric personal transportation vehicles (PTVs) shall be equipped with, at a minimum, all factory installed safety systems and a charge indicator for low battery. 
(d)  All personal transportation vehicles (PTVs) regulated by this article shall be maintained in safe condition at all times. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.6 - Operation on Local Roads; PTVs Not Permitted Multi-Use Paths, Golf Cart Paths and Crossings, or Within School Zones Unless Specifically Authorized by Mayor and Council Through Resolution. 
Personal transportation vehicles as defined above in 22.7.1 and by O.C.G. A. § 40-1-1 (43.1), also known as motorized carts, may be operated on public roads within the City of Roswell that have a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. 
Personalized transportation vehicles may not be operated on sidewalks, or on state roads, or federal highways, or local roads where a separate designated motorized cart path is provided. PTVs are not allowed on multi-use paths, public golf paths and crossings, or within school zones unless specifically permitted by mayor and council by resolution. Delay of other motorized vehicles is not permitted. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.7 - Occupants. 
The number of occupants in a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on personal transportation vehicle (PTV). The operator or any occupant shall be seated in the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) and no parts of the bodies of the operator or any occupant shall extend outside the perimeter of the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) while the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) is being operated. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.8 - Traffic Rules; Designation of Crossings, Multi-Use Paths and School Zones on or in Which a Personal Transportation Vehicle (PTV) May Be Used. 
The operator of the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) shall comply with all traffic rules and regulations adopted by the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A. Title 40) and the City of Roswell (city code chapter 22) which govern the operation of motor vehicles. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 5/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.9 - Hazardous Activities. 
No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the authorized roads. Such hazardous activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Racing of any kind; 
(b)  Blocking of public access; 
(c)  Vehicles shall not loiter or park on roads, bridges or in underpasses; 
(d)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way to ensure safe passage; 
(e)  An audible warning shall be given by operators of personal transportation vehicle (PTV) when approaching pedestrians from the rear; 
(f)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and the use thereof, including open container laws, apply to the operator and occupants of personal transportation vehicle (PTV). 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.10 - Penalty. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of the Roswell City Code. An owner, lessee or operator may be cited to appear in the Roswell Municipal Court. Upon finding by such court that an owner, lessee, or operator of a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) has violated any provision of this article, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, along with court costs in the amount that same now exists, or may hereafter be determined by ordinance or statute. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.11 - Exclusions. 
Owners or operators of personal transportation vehicle (PTV) upon private property, within the confines of a golf course or crossing a public street at a designated golf cart crossing shall not be subject to the requirements of this article. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.12 - Liability Disclaimer. 
This section is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets, and the City of Roswell in no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets or roads. The city, by regulating such operation is merely trying to address obvious safety issues, and adoption of this section is not to be relied upon as a determination that operating on public streets is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this section. All persons who operate or ride upon personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on public streets or roads do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicycles, and pedestrians. The City of Roswell has no liability under any theory of liability and the city assumes no liability for permitting personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on public streets and roads. Any person who operates a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) is responsible for procuring liability insurance sufficient to cover the risk involved in using a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on the public streets and roads. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Section 22.7.13 - Registration and Affidavit of Owner; Fee. 
The owner of a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) must register the PTV with the city once every five (5) years for a fee not to exceed $15.00. Mayor and council shall approve by resolution the registration policy and registration form to be used, any necessary registration identification to be placed on the personal transportation vehicle (PTV) and shall provide for fees as allowed by state law. As part of the registration process, each owner shall be required to sign an affidavit that the information provided by the owner on the registration form is true and correct to the best of his knowledge and that the owner will abide by all City of Roswell laws and regulations regarding ownership and operation of a PTV, as well as any applicable state law. 
( 2015-05-09 , § 1, Added 05/11/2015) 
Article 22.8 - Pedicabs 

Section 22.8.1 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Authorized route: The city streets upon which a pedicab is allowed to operate, as established by resolution of mayor and council and maintained by the director of community development or his or her designee. 
City: The City of Roswell, Georgia. 
Driver: Any person who drives or operates a pedicab on city streets for a pedicab company. 
Driver's license: That license issued by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-20 permitting an individual to operate a motor vehicle in the State of Georgia. 
Operator: The holder of a permit to operate a pedicab business pursuant to this article, whether a person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
Pedicab: Any non-motorized or motor-assisted vehicle with three (3) or more wheels operated by one (1) person for transporting passengers in seats or on a platform made a part of the vehicle. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.2 - Pedicabs Restricted to Authorized Route. 
Pedicabs may only be operated or driven along a route, or in an area, authorized by mayor and council by resolution. a map of such authorized route or area shall be maintained by the director of community development or his or her designee and shall be made available to all applicants for a pedicab operator's permit. Mayor and council may change the authorized route by resolution at any time. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.3 - Pedicab Permit Required Annually. 
No person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall engage in the business of operating a pedicab within the city without first obtaining an annual pedicab operator's permit. The fee for such permit shall be established by mayor and council by resolution. A pedicab permit may be issued to an operator that does not maintain a fixed place of business within the city. Pedicab permits shall be issued by the director of community development or by his or her designee. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.4 - Requirements to Obtain Pedicab Operator's Permit. 
In order to receive a pedicab operator's permit, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or a person who has otherwise been granted employment by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(3)  Provide proof of insurance as required by this article; 
(4)  Provide the name of a person associated with the applicant's business to receive correspondence or complaints regarding the pedicab operation, and a permanent address and phone number for the pedicab business; and 
(5)  Pay the fee required for a pedicab operator's permit. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.5 - Required Insurance. 
No pedicab operator shall operate or authorize any other person to operate a pedicab in the city unless it is covered by a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in Georgia, which provides the following minimum coverage: 
$25,000.00—For injury to or death of one (1) person in one (1) accident; 
$50,000.00—For injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one (1) accident; and 
$25,000.00—For injury to or destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident. 
Each pedicab operated within the city shall be required to carry and maintain in effect this minimum insurance coverage. Proof of such insurance coverage, including the name of the issuing company, the amounts of coverage provided, and the policy number shall be provided to the city before a permit shall issue. Such insurance shall provide specific coverage for the pedicab used in the business of transporting passengers. Failure to maintain such coverage shall constitute cause for revocation of a city permit. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.6 - Requirements for Pedicab. 
Each pedicab must: 
(1)  Be no more than one hundred twenty (120) inches in length or fifty-five (55) inches in width; 
(2)  Be equipped with reflectors and electrically powered lights, including turn signals; 
(3)  Use electrically powered lights when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining; 
(4)  Have lights and reflectors mounted so that they are visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet in any direction; 
(5)  Have the name of the pedicab operator displayed on each side of the pedicab; 
(6)  Be equipped with a brake that will enable the driver to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level pavement; and 
(7)  Be maintained in a safe mechanical condition and a clean and sanitary condition. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.7 - Prohibitions. 
A pedicab operator or driver may not operate or drive a pedicab: 
(1)  On any street with a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater, except for the purpose of crossing that street; 
(2)  For the purpose of advertising, as with a "billboard bike," or with advertising for any person or entity who is not the pedicab operator; 
(3)  To obstruct the flow of pedestrian traffic by remaining stopped on a sidewalk, except for the time necessary to pick up or drop off passengers; 
(4)  Without having rates displayed in clear view of all passengers, nor may a driver collect fares, make change, or allow passengers to board or exit the pedicab while it is in motion; 
(5)  Carry more passengers than the rated seating capacity of the pedicab. For the purpose of this subsection, a child under age five shall not count as a passenger; or 
(6)  Solely for transportation of cargo. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.8 - Requirements for Pedicab Driver. 
Each driver of a pedicab operated within the city must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and possess a valid driver's license issued by the State of Georgia. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.9 - Pedicabs Must Obey Rules of Road for Bicycles. 
Pedicabs shall be subject to traffic laws governing bicycles as provided by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-291. Violations of traffic laws shall be punishable as allowed by state law or city ordinance. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Section 22.8.10 - Violation of Ordinance May Result in Revocation of Pedicab Permit. 
The director of community development, or his or her designee, may revoke a pedicab permit for any violation of any city ordinance or state law. In order to revoke a pedicab permit, the city must send written notice of the revocation to the person and address listed in the permit application by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by statutory overnight delivery. Such notice shall specify the violation by date and ordinance or state law section. Revocation shall become effective no sooner than fifteen (15) days after the date such notice is sent to the pedicab operator or his or her designee. Before the effective date of the revocation, a pedicab operator may file an appeal in writing with the director of community development. Such appeal will be heard by mayor and council at a regularly scheduled council meeting not later than forty five (45) days after such appeal is filed. The standard of review for mayor and council will be the "any evidence" standard. 
(2012-02-01, § 1, Added, 02/27/2012) 
Chapter 24 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES 
Article 24.1 - General 

Section 24.1.1 - Services Provided. 
The city may provide for the following utilities and services: 
(a)  Garbage and solid waste disposal; 
(b)  Collection of commercial waste; 
(c)  Recycling; 
(d)  Water and sewer; 
(e)  Stormwater management; 
(f)  Scrap tire management; 
and any other service or utility authorized by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2007-02-02, Added, 02/05/2007) 
State Law reference— Local home rule powers under Georgia Constitution art IX, § II, par. III(a)(6) and (7) include sewage collection and disposal systems and the development, storage, treatment, purification and distribution of water. 
Section 24.1.2 - Deposit. 
As a condition of providing services and/or utilities, there shall be collected a single deposit fee for new accounts within the city. Said fee shall cover all service and utility accounts and shall be refundable. Said deposit shall be held in a general account of the city and shall bear no interest and be determined by resolution of mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-10-28 , § 1, Amended 10/12/2015; 2007-02-02, Added, 02/05/2007) 
Article 24.2 - Garbage and Solid Waste Disposal 

Section 24.2.1 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Appurtenances means, for purposes of this ordinance, includes, but is not limited to water meters, water valves, sample stations, flush stations and fire hydrants. 
Authorized agent means designee of owner of the property. Excludes tenants. 
Commercial waste means all waste byproducts of manufacturing or commercial establishments, cinders and ashes from commercial boilers, and cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels. 
Curbside means a location near the street, behind the curb-line and not blocking a sidewalk, where trash receptacles are readily accessible to collection vehicles. The environmental/public works director or his/her designee may authorize the location of containers within the public right-of-way at specified places and times when such location is necessary for the expeditious collection of garbage. 
Entity means the actual business or house for collection. 
Environmental/public works director means represents the city in matters concerning sanitation, stormwater or water utilities or designates his/her representative. 
Garbage means domestic waste including meat, vegetable and fruit scraps, cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, rags, ashes and other such waste material ordinarily disposed from residences, churches, schools, small business establishments and other such places. Animals, fowl and fish entrails, bones and carcasses whether in whole or in part, from business establishments such as slaughterhouses and meat and fish markets shall not constitute "garbage", but shall constitute "other waste." 
Large items means furniture, appliances, and the like which are of no use to a homeowner or charity. 
Other waste means animal, fowl and fish excrement, entrails, bones, carcasses in whole or in part and dead animals, and any other refuse material not otherwise classified herein. 
Other yard waste means yard waste which is loose and not bagged. 
Owner means person or persons who own the actual property whether commercial, industrial, multi-family or residential. 
Recyclables includes comingled materials designated by the environmental/public works department as part of the city recycling program and not required to be separated prior to collection. 
Recycling means to treat or process to make suitable for reuse. 
Recycling container is a watertight plastic container equipped with a lid and authorized by the environmental/public works department for use as part of the city recycling program. 
Scavenger means any person who salvages or collects for a fee, resale or other use, any garbage, paper, cardboard, boxes, crates or other waste which are to be disposed from any residence or establishment where people reside, congregate or are employed. 
Scout truck means a collection vehicle used in areas inaccessible to the rear-loading compactor and in additional circumstances when authorized by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. 
Yard waste means yard waste such as weeds, grass and hedge trimmings, leaves, brush, tree limbs and other such material contained in bags or other approved container. 
( 2019-01-08 , § 1, Amended 01/14/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.2.2 - City to Collect Garbage, Recycling and Yard Waste. 
The City of Roswell will collect all household garbage, recycling and yard waste generated within the city limits. No permits will be issued to private companies to collect household garbage, recycling and yard waste unless the city is unable to furnish the service. Such services shall be authorized by the city as needed. The city shall issue a letter with a set permit fee at that time. 
( 2019-01-08 , § 1, Amended 01/14/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-01-08 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, changed the title of § 24.2.2 from "City to Collect Garbage and Yard Waste" to read as herein set out. 
Section 24.2.3 - Commencement of Service. 
All property owners or their authorized agents shall be required to pay for garbage/solid waste collection and disposal for all habitable property within the city and for the payment of fees to the city for such services. An owner or authorized agent shall notify the finance department of the city of proper contact and billing information and shall be responsible for updating said information as needed. Garbage and solid waste collection fees shall be a charge against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015; 2004-06-14, Amended 06/07/2004; 2001-08-06, Amended 08/20/2001) 
Section 24.2.4 - Fees. 
The collection fees for residences, commercial establishments, factories and other business places shall be such as may be set from time to time by the mayor and city council. 
(a)  Cost . The finance department of the city shall maintain on file and make available to the public a record of the costs, fees, service charges and deposits for curbside garbage collection and any additional fees for special circumstances including but not limited to scout truck service. Non-payment of fees shall be cause for the imposition of late fees as determined by resolution of mayor and council and shall also cause a penalty as determined by resolution of mayor and council. Continued delinquent accounts shall be subject to imposition of a lien against the property served, in accordance with the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-10-28 , § 2, Amended 10/12/2015; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015; 2004-06-14, Amended 06/07/2004, (a) amended; 2001-08-06, Amended 08/20/2001, deletion of old subsection (b) "Deposits"; 2001-08-06, Amended 08/20/2001, (a) Addition of last sentence)) 
Section 24.2.5 - Garbage and Recycling Containers; Collection. 
(a)  Every individual residence or premises where people reside shall be provided with a household garbage container or containers sufficient to accommodate seven (7) days accumulation of garbage. 
(1)  Standard garbage collection service shall be provided for one (1) container. Residents must use the provided container for curbside household garbage collection. 
(2)  Premium garbage collection service shall be provided for two (2) containers at an additional cost as determined by mayor and city council. 
(3)  Every individual residence or premises where people reside shall be provided, upon request, with one (1) recycling container for curbside collection of approved recyclables. Residents must use the provided container for curbside recycling collection. It shall be unlawful to place garbage or recycling for collection in a box, tub, crate or container that is not provided by the city. All garbage and recycling must be placed in the provided container(s) for collection. Subject to article 18.2 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances, any garbage, recycling, yard waste, or other waste defined in this chapter left at curbside shall be deemed waste material and shall, subject to the limitations of this chapter, be picked up by the city at a charge to the property owner or his authorized agent. Those owners or authorized agents exceeding the amount or type of garbage and/or waste allowed shall be deemed in violation of this article and shall be subject to those general penalties described in section 1.1.3 of the Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Garbage and recycling containers shall be placed at the curb no earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before pickup. To insure pickup, containers should be placed at the curb no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(c)  Garbage shall be collected from the curbside, or other suitable location authorized by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee, at residential premises once weekly. 
(d)  Non-collectable and prohibited items. Certain items, by their nature, prohibit disposal or collection by ordinary or routine means due to their size, weight, volume, bulk, putrescibility, injurious or hazardous characteristics. The following is a nonexclusive list of the type of items that shall not be collected by the service provider as part of its routine service. This includes curbside-recycling collection. Placement of these items or similar items in receptacles serviced by both the garbage and recycling providers is prohibited: 
(1)  The placement of the following prohibited items in receptacles placed on the curb for pickup by the city is unlawful and punishable according to section 1.1.3 of this Code in addition to any federal and state penalties. The environmental/public works department shall maintain, on file, information regarding proper disposal practices for prohibited items. 
a.  Vehicle batteries. 
b.  Toxic, caustic, infectious, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous waste: 
The service provider shall not collect nor handle toxic, caustic, infectious, contagious, explosive or otherwise hazardous waste for disposal. Such waste shall be disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local laws and procedures. 
(2)  Items similar to, but not limited by the following, may be collected curbside only after payment by phone or in person at the City of Roswell Finance Department: 
a.  Household appliances and furniture. 
b.  Carpets or carpet scraps. 
c.  Bed mattresses and box springs. 
(3)  Curbside collection of more than five (5) items must be approved by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. Additional fees may apply. 
( 2019-01-08 , § 1, Amended 01/14/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015; 2005-12-17, Amended 12/19/2005, 3 rd paragraph of (a) amended to 50 gallons; 2004-09-20, Amended 09/08/2004, (a) changed to 50 gallons; 2004-09-20, Amended 09/08/2004, (a) amended; 2004-06-14, Amended 06/07/2004, (a) amended; 2003-11-25, Amended 11/17/2003, (d) added) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-01-08 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, changed the title of § 24.2.5 from "Garbage Containers; Collection" to read as herein set out. 
Section 24.2.6 - Collection Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the curbside requirement may be granted, at the discretion of the environmental/public works director or his/her designee of the city. Scout truck service is available upon request and/or upon reasonable verification for the disabled or persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.2.7 - Yard Waste—Preparation and Placement for Collection. 
(a)  All leaves, pine needles and other small items of yard waste shall be bagged and/or placed in a thirty-gallon, fifty-pound weight, wet strength Kraft paper sack or other container identified as containing yard waste and made of metal or plastic with solid bottom and close-fitting metal or plastic cover with a maximum capacity of fifty (50) gallons. Containers shall be placed as directed above in subsection 24.2.5(b). Holiday schedules may cause adjustment of the day of collection, and periods of heavy usage, such as following a major storm or annual pruning season, may result in delays. 
(b)  Tree trunks and large limbs and other waste that cannot be loaded by hand will remain the responsibility of the property owner. Tree contractors and professional landscaping businesses shall be responsible for disposal of their own waste. 
(c)  Yard waste shall be collected by city trucks on days established by the mayor and city council; provided, that at no time shall trash be placed in such a manner as to obstruct gutters, drains, walkways or streets. Tree limbs and branches which exceed four (4) feet in length or six (6) inches in diameter will not be picked up by city crews. 
(d)  Routine weekly collection will include up to twelve (12) thirty-gallon Kraft paper sacks or their equivalent in containerized yard waste material or up to two (2) cubic yards of loose limbs and branches as described at subsection 24.2.7(c), or an equivalent total. For pickup of excess quantities beyond the two (2) cubic yards or twelve (12) bags, contact the environmental/public works director or his/her designee for payment and scheduling. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.2.8 - "Other Waste", Disposal by Owner; Hospital Wastes, etc. 
(a)  "Other waste", as defined in this chapter, shall be disposed of by persons in charge of the residence or establishment where such wastes are generated. Disposal shall be at the disposal facility designated by the city or as authorized by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any soiled linen, cotton or bandages, or waste or refuse of any kind from any hospital, sanitarium, infirmary, clinic or undertaker's shop, whether public or private, in any manner except by incineration, unless otherwise directed by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. Kitchen wastes from such establishments are expressly exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Amended 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.2.9 - Burning Leaves or Yard Waste on Streets. 
No person shall burn leaves or other yard waste in the streets of the city. Open burning of any kind is prohibited except as authorized by this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.2.10 - Littering Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or other public place in the city or the river, creek, branch, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the jurisdiction of the city, any kind of leaves, dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid. Nor shall any person, firm or corporation cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the city in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into any of the aforementioned places; provided, that this section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit authorized by any ordinance of the city; or to goods, wares or merchandise deposited upon any public way or other public place temporarily, in the necessary course of trade and removed therefrom within two (2) hours after being so deposited; or to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the city sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the city relating thereto. 
(b)  All business firms dispensing their product in cups, plates, wrappers, sacks and other similar forms of containers shall provide adequate metal or plastic containers upon the premises for collection of refuse. It shall be the express responsibility of all such business firms to collect all cups, plates, wrappers, sacks and other similar forms of containers dispensed by said business that may be discarded upon the premises or neighboring street and sidewalks. It further shall be the responsibility of said business to collect the aforementioned items from the premises of the neighboring property when the owners of the property specifically request and authorize the business personnel to enter upon their property for that purpose. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of, or who fails to perform any duty imposed by this section or who violates any order or determination of the department promulgated pursuant to this article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1.1.3 and, in addition thereto, may be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Any willful and wanton violation of this subsection resulting in the unlawful littering of the streets, sidewalks and neighboring property shall be deemed a nuisance and on conviction thereof by the city court of Roswell, the mayor and council may after notice and a hearing revoke the business license of the violator. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.2.11 - Dogs Spreading Garbage. 
It is specifically declared that dogs violating the leash provisions of chapter 8 of this Code and which turn over garbage containers or spread garbage over the streets or rights-of-way of the city shall constitute a nuisance capable of abatement in the municipal court of the city, in addition to any penalties imposed under chapter 8 or section 1.1.3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Sections 24.2.12—24.2.26 - Reserved. 
Article 24.3 - Collection of Commercial Waste[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-07-18, § 1, adopted July 13, 2015, repealed the former Art. 24.3, §§ 24.3.1—24.3.6, and enacted a new Art. 24.3 as set out herein. The former Art. 24.3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2001-08-06, adopted Aug. 20, 2001; Ord. No. 2004-06-14, adopted June 7, 2004; Ord. No. 2007-03-03, adopted Mar. 5, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-01-01, adopted Jan. 7, 2008. 

Section 24.3.1 - When Commercial Garbage Receptacles Required. 
The owners and/or operators of commercial and industrial establishments and/or apartment houses, including public housing consisting of six (6) or more living units, shall, subject to the determination of the environmental/public works director or his/her designee, rent from the city commercial containers in sufficient number to adequately contain the garbage and refuse disposal at the location. The type, size, number and location of commercial containers required by this section shall be subject to the approval of the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to collect fees from tenants, leases or association owners. Common containers may be requested for commercial garbage service; however, a written request must be submitted to the environmental/public works director or his/her designee for approval before such arrangement is allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.3.2 - Placement of Commercial Containers. 
Commercial containers required by this article shall be placed as required by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. If a commercial container is placed at any location other than that directed by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee or if sufficient access to the container is blocked or obstructed in any manner, the container will not be emptied. The failure of the city to pick up garbage or trash under such circumstances shall not affect the garbage container rental or rate for this service. A written sanitation plan is required and should be approved by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. At a minimum the sanitation plan should include proposed location and number of dumpsters/containers, frequency of service, sharing information (if applicable) and contact information. All commercial refuse areas must be constructed in accordance with section 12.9 refuse regulations of the City of Roswell Unified Development Code and the City of Roswell Standard Construction Specifications or the Fulton County Standard Construction Specifications as applicable. 
( 2019-01-08 , § 1, Amended 01/14/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.3.3 - Commercial Containers Not to be Left on Streets; Exception. 
Commercial containers containing garbage, ashes or other refuse material shall not be left for collection upon any street, sidewalk, avenue or other public place, except as specifically authorized by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.3.4 - Night Collections. 
Whenever the mayor and the council shall decide that the best interests of the public will be served by the collection of garbage from certain areas in the city at night, the environmental/public works director or his/her designee shall be directed to make such collection. 
The environmental/public works director or his/her designee shall notify the occupants of the places of business within the designated area that the garbage will be picked up during certain hours and that the containers must be placed in the place designated for the pickup. All persons so notified shall comply with such order and shall place the containers as designated within such hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.3.5 - Rates for Trash Collection; Rates for Pickup for Industrial and Commercial Establishments and Certain Other Units. 
(a)  Commercial. Rates for commercial collection as established from time to time by the mayor and council shall be maintained on file in the finance department. Non-payment of fees will be subject to penalties and interest and continued delinquent accounts will be subject to imposition of a lien against the property served, in accordance with the city charter. 
(b)  Pick up for containers not provided by the City of Roswell Environmental/Public Works Department. The environmental/public works director or his/her designee can decide to authorize collection of garbage (trash) not contained in an authorized city container. The rate for collection will be determined by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee depending upon the particular circumstances of the request. 
(c)  Cost for use of private service. Any entity authorized to use a private garbage and trash removing service under section 24.1.2 of this article, shall pay the city for use of city infrastructure and other costs to the city, a monthly sum per unit and/or using entity as established by mayor and council such as to offset the costs to the city. 
(d)  Service fee. Every establishment (commercial, industrial, multi-family) shall be required to pay a fee to the city to cover the cost of setting up service and provisions of dumpsters for use. This will apply to all new accounts opened after September 1, 2001. These fees are non-refundable. The service fee shall be established from time to time by the mayor and council and shall be maintained on file in the finance department. 
( 2019-01-08 , § 1, Amended 01/14/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2016-05-04 , § 1, Amended 05/09/2016; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Section 24.3.6 - Special Requirements. 
(a)  No building materials or refuse from building, remodeling, repair operations or landscape work will be handled by city forces. All waste material of this nature shall be removed by the contractor, or in the event of his failure, by the owner of the property; provided, that the owner may make application to the environmental/public works director or his/her designee may, if practical, remove the rubbish at the expense of the owner. The charge made for such service shall be determined in each case with relation to the service performed or if a hardship exists determined by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee. 
(b)  Industrial wastes from factories, processing plants, dry cleaning operations and other manufacturing operations shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the enterprise. 
(c)  The environmental/public works director or his/her designee may remove any waste materials for which no provision is made in this section, provided the cost that is determined by the environmental/public works director or his/her designee as being reasonable for the service performed is paid by the person making application for the removal of such waste material. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-07-18 , § 1, Added 07/13/2015) 
Article 24.4 - Recycling at Multi-Family Complexes 

Section 24.4.1 - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "multi-family complex" shall have the meaning ascribed in sections 2.1.1, building type descriptions, of the Unified Development Code (UDC). This ordinance shall apply to condominiums and townhomes not presently receiving curbside service. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2014-02-03, § 1, Amended 2/24/2014) 
Section 24.4.2 - Recycling Program Created. 
All multi-family complexes located within the corporate limits of the city shall institute a recycling program within sixty (60) days of the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.4.3 - Collection. 
At a minimum, all such complexes shall collect and make provision for the collection of the following items: newspapers, glass separated by color (clear, brown, and green), aluminum cans, bi-metal cans (i.e. vegetable and pet food cans), and number 1 (milk jugs) and number 2 (soda bottles) plastics, and aluminum foil. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.4.4 - Notice of Location of Collection Devices. 
All such complexes shall notify each resident, in writing, of the availability and location of collection devices. Proof of such notification shall be tendered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.4.5 - Quarterly Reports. 
All such complexes shall make quarterly reports to the city of the material collected and their respective weights. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.4.6 - Penalty. 
The failure of any such complex to comply with the provisions of this article shall subject the owner thereof to punishment as provided in section 1.1.3 of this Code. In addition, such failure shall constitute a nuisance capable of abatement in the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017) 
Article 24.5 - Water and Sewer[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009, amended Art. 24.5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 24.5, §§ 24.5.1—24.5.43, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-11-01, adopted Nov. 20, 2000; Ord. No. 2001-11-05, adopted Nov. 19, 2001; Ord. No. 2003-12-26, adopted Dec. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 2004-06-14, adopted June 7, 2004; Ord. No. 2006-07-15, adopted July 5, 2006; and Ord. of Aug. 18, 2008, § 1. 

Section 24.5.1 - Commencement of Service—Application Required. 
Water shall not be introduced in any premises without application having first been made in the finance department, and authorization having been officially granted by the director of environmental/public works or his/her designee. Every application made must be by the owner of the property to be benefited or by an authorized agent, and said application must be made on a form prescribed by the mayor and council. Forms may be obtained from the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.2 - Contract Period. 
No water contract shall be made for a less period than one (1) year, except where parties remove from the premises, and for building purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.3 - Rates, Fees, Service Charges and Deposits. 
A schedule of rates, fees, service charges and deposits for water and sewer, as established by resolution of mayor and council, shall be maintained on file in the finance department of the city. Such schedule of rates, fees, service charges, consumption levels, and deposits shall be subject to adjustment from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.4 - Bills—Billing Period; Payment Date, Penalty. 
All water bills shall be paid at the location designated on the bill not later than fifteen (15) days after the due date printed on the bill. All customers failing to pay the total amount due by the sixteenth day following the due date shall be subject to fees, penalties and disconnection of service. Penalties and late fees as established in section 24.2.4 shall apply. 
If water service is disconnected, additional fees shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2015-10-28 , § 3, Amended 10/12/2015; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.5 - Water Cutoff List, Reconnection Charge. 
Procedures and fees for water cutoff and reconnection, as established by mayor and council on December 1, 2003, shall be maintained on file in the utility billing office of the finance department. Such procedures and fees shall be subject to adjustment from time to time by resolution of mayor and council. 
The above service charge for being placed on the cutoff list and being notified of such does not in any way affect the right of the city to cut off the water of any user not paying the water bill in the time prescribed elsewhere in this article or affect the cut-on service charge after the water has been cut off. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.6 - Authorized Personnel Only to Turn Water On or Off. 
No person except one (1) legally authorized will be allowed to turn water on or off at the meter box. 
No person shall, by the use of a false key or otherwise, after the water has been turned off from any premises, cause said premises to be supplied with water, except through the director of environmental/public works, or his/her designee, under orders of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.7 - Illegal Use of Water. 
Should any person use the city water without the knowledge of director of environmental/public works, or his/her designee and it shall come to the knowledge of the director of environmental/public works or his/her designee, that the water has been illegally used, a bill shall be made against the consumer of the water for the amount that has been used. It shall be the duty of the director of environmental/public works or his/her designee, to cut off the water from the premises and issue a citation for violation of section 1.1.3. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.8 - Tapping by Authorized Personnel Only. 
No person but the director of environmental/public works or his/her designee, or person authorized by him shall tap any main or distributing pipe or connection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.9 - Meters—One for Each House. 
In no case shall more than one (1) house be supplied through the same meter, but each separate house or premises shall have its own meter and receive water only through the meter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.9.1 - Use of Sub-Meters for Multi-Tenant Properties. 
Owners of property that is used by multiple tenants, whether commercial or residential, shall be required to install sub-meters for water use for each such tenant. The cost of such sub-meter shall be borne by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.10 - Fees. 
The fees for water meters for the city's water system shall be maintained by the finance department. The director of environmental/public works, or his/her designee, shall provide the finance department with an up-to-date list of fees annually. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.11 - Curb Stop and Boxes—City Property; Pipes into Premises Private Property. 
The curb stop and meter box at the curb are the property of the city and are placed there for its sole use. The pipes from the ball valve into the premises of the customer are private property and all repairs to same must be made at the customer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.12 - Location of Water Meters. 
All water meters shall be installed at an easily accessible location on or near the property line of the premises being served adjacent to the public right-of-way. Water meters shall not be installed behind enclosed fences, concrete or paved driveways, parking areas or in sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.13 - Obstruction of Meter Box. 
The city personnel must have access to all water appurtenances. These include, but are not limited to water meters, water valves, sample stations, flush stations and fire hydrants. The water utility customer is responsible to trim and remove any bushes, trees, plants, sod, landscaping, fencing, etc. that may cover or obstruct access to a water appurtenance, such as a water meter or valve. A three-foot (914mm) clear space shall be maintained at all times around the circumference of the water appurtenance except as otherwise required or approved by the director of environmental/public works or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.14 - Shut Off Valves which are Private Property. 
A shut off valve shall be placed by every property owner near the street, immediately inside the property line, such shut off valve to be under the control of the tenant or owner, to be used by the customer in case of a burst pipe or other necessity where pipes to be repaired can be cut off from the main. The shut off valve is not intended to take the place of the ordinary shut off valve located within the premises to be used to drain pipes to prevent damages by freezing. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.15 - Right of Entry of Officers; Shutting Off Water in Emergency; Non-Liability of Council for Water Shortage. 
The director of environmental/public works or his/her designee, and the city police shall have the right at all hours to enter upon any premises where the city water is taken for the purpose of inspecting the pipes and fixtures, setting and repairing meters, turning water on or off, examining the sanitary condition incident to the use of the water and enforcing the rules generally. Every denial of this right will render the offending party liable to fine or imprisonment, or both, in the discretion of the recorder. The director of environmental/public works or his/her designee, may stop the supply of water in case of emergency, and shut it off for repairs or extensions, he being the sole judge of the time and necessity therefor, reasonable notice being given when practicable. The city shall not be liable in damages for any insufficient supply of water by the city at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.16 - Extension of Service. 
Customers living beyond the limits of the existing water system may obtain water service by extending the pipeline to their premises from the nearest pipeline in service, which subscribers will be required to pay for all material and labor necessary for the extension of said line. All extensions shall be made by the city and subject to the approval of the director of environmental/public works, or his/her designee. When extensions have been made, and approved, the city agrees to furnish meters, curb stops, meter boxes, etc., and make connections at the regular rate of charges for this service set out in section 24.5.3, when line is completed. The customer(s) will pay a deposit of the estimated cost of said line up front and charged for with the water service. After new line and appurtenances have been installed, any monies left over from deposit shall be refunded to customer(s). The extension shall become the property of the city and a part of the city's potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.17 - Waterline Material—Specified. 
The required material for all waterlines installed in the city's potable water system, shall be in compliance with city specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.18 - Installation and Payment for Water Lines on Existing Dedicated Streets Inside the City Limits. 
(a)  The owners of property abutting on an existing dedicated street which does not have water furnished by the city or Fulton County may petition the mayor and city council for such water service. If the owners of fifty-one (51) percent of the lineal feet of frontage of the land abutting the street to be served sign said petition requesting water service, the city will, after determining that such petition is in proper form, set a date for a public hearing on the installation of the water line. Such hearing will be published once a week for at least two (2) weeks in the official newspaper of the city. Provided however, if one hundred (100) percent of the owners of the lineal feet of frontage of the land liable to assessment for such improvement shall sign the petition requesting that the water line be installed, no public hearing will be required. If the installation of the water line is approved by the city council, the city will make the necessary arrangements to make water available to property located on said street, the costs of such water line extension shall be borne by the property owners abutting the street to be served. The water line assessment for each property owner will be made on a front footage basis. Such water line assessments shall become due and payable before the water line is installed by the city. After new line and appurtenances have been installed, any monies left over from deposit shall be refunded to customer(s). 
(b)  Definitions. 
Street means any existing street or a block of any existing street located within the city limits of Roswell to which the city has title. 
Lineal feet of frontage means front footage abutting the street to be served. 
Property owner means the owner of the legal title to the real estate abutting the street to be served. 
Water line assessment means the amount of money due the city by the property owner for construction of the water line. 
Water line means the main line from which water service can be procured by the land owners. This does not include tapping, supplying and installing meter, stopcock, curb box, etc. as set forth in section 24.5.2. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.19 - Meddling with Waterworks System and Other Illegal Acts. 
(a)  Prohibited acts enumerated. It shall be unlawful for anyone to interfere or to intermeddle with any reservoir, water tank and tower, basin, or the water therein, or the water mains, pipes, hydrants, plugs, meters or any connections of the waterworks system within or without the city, or to climb a tank tower or standpipe, or to make any connections therewith by tapping the mains or pipes, or tank tower, or to throw anything in the same, or in the reservoir, or in any part of the system, in violation of the rules or regulations of the mayor and council, or to permit any of these several things above enumerated to be done upon his premises or the premises under his control, or to make use of such unauthorized connections made by anyone. Any person found guilty of any of the above mentioned offenses shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct and punished as prescribed by section 1.1.3. 
(b)  Compliance with section 24.5.26. The director of environmental/public works or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to monitor compliance with section 24.5.26 and issue a citation(s) when it is deemed necessary. 
(c)  Penalty provisions. Any person found guilty of violating section 24.5.26 or any part of section 24.5.26 shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct and punished as prescribed by section 1.1.3. Furthermore, punishment shall include restitution for the following: 
(1)  The total cost incurred by the city to repair or replace facilities damaged as a result of the violation. 
(2)  Any injury or damage to persons or property and/or loss of services resulting from the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.20 - Plumbing and Water Conservation. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings, and to require the labeling of plumbing fixtures with information regarding flow rates for the purpose of conserving water to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and reduce wastewater flows. 
(b)  Definitions. As referred to in this section: 
Commercial building shall mean any type of building other than residential. 
Plumbing fixtures shall mean any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building shall mean any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet shall mean any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal shall mean any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(c)  Standards. No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in subsection (c)(1). This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in subsection (e). The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be July 1, 1991, and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992, and for government/municipality buildings shall be July 1, 2009. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to above should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 

 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and an integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (c)(1) above. 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (c)(1). 
(4)  All plumbing fixtures installed in government/municipality buildings shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 

 
Fixtures and equipment labeled WaterSense&reg; shall be the standard whenever possible. Future changes approved for WaterSense products that exceed the performance specifications above shall supersede these specifications. 
(d)  Product labeling. Effective July 1, 1991, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled by the manufacturer to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture. The water use rate of the fixture shall be certified by the manufacturer based on independent test results and using sixty (60) psi for showerheads. The label shall be fixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the product packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail sale. 
(e)  Exceptions. The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in subsection (c): 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for use by the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
Permission for the exceptions listed herein must be obtained from the chief building inspector. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any building or plumbing contractors, developers, etc., who violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to suspension of their business license for a period of up to ninety (90) days. 
(g)  Compliance and enforcement. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (f), the city may take other actions as described below to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section: 
(1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in subsection (c) shall be determined by the chief building inspector or his/her agent in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. 
(2)  The appropriate water authority or water service agency may deny any service connection to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in subsection (c). 
(3)  Compliance with the requirements in subsection (d), regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the chief building inspector or his/her agent. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for retail sale or sell plumbing fixtures at retail for purposes of determining compliance with subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.21 - Water Waste. 
Water waste is defined as water used without obtaining maximum beneficial use thereof. Water waste shall also include, but not be limited to, causing, suffering, or permitting a flow of water used for landscape watering to run into any river, creek or other natural water source or drain, superficial or underground channel, or into any sanitary or storm sewer, any street, road or highway or other impervious surface area, or upon the lands of another person or upon public lands. Water waste shall also include, but not be limited to, any discharge of water used for commercial, industrial, municipal or domestic purposes to any storm, sanitary sewer, or septic system without the user first having obtained maximum beneficial use thereof. Water waste shall also include, but not be limited to, failure to repair any controllable leak on property owned by any registered meter customer. 
It shall be a violation of the city for any person in the city limits to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or criminally negligently allow or cause water waste, to allow or cause landscape watering outside the prescribed hours for landscape watering. 
The customer will be given a time table to cease water waste. If water waste has not ceased the customer will be subject to fines and/or water service termination as defined under section 1.1.3. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.22 - Conservation Measures Relating to Lawn and Landscape Irrigation. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce discretionary outdoor water use and avoid wasting water by adopting more efficient irrigation system design requirements. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Flow sensor means an inline device that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. 
(2)  Landscape irrigation system means an assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution of water to irrigate landscapes. 
(3)  Landscape means ground cover, trees, shrubs, and other plants. 
(4)  Large landscape means the landscape areas associated with a development (excluding single-family homes) served by one (1) or more landscape irrigation systems where all irrigated areas added together total more than one (1) acre (or forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet). 
(5)  Master shut-off valve is an automatic valve such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) capable of being automatically closed by the WaterSense controller. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the landscape irrigation system. 
(6)  Rain sensor shut-off means an electric device that detects and measures rainfall amounts and overrides the cycle of a landscape irrigation system so as to turn off such system when a predetermined amount of rain has fallen. 
(7)  WaterSense controller means weather-based irrigation controllers labeled under the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense program, which includes standalone controllers, add-on devices, and plug-in devices that use current weather data as a basis for scheduling irrigation. 
(c)  Applicability and exceptions. The section applies to all landscape irrigation systems except those (a) used for commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, (b) used for golf courses, and (c) dependent upon a nonpublic water source. 
(d)  Avoiding water waste through design. All landscape irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, and operated to prevent runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. This requirement helps ensure compliance with, and is in addition to, the City of Roswell's Water Waste Ordinance [section] 24.5.21. 
(e)  General landscape irrigation system requirements. Regardless of whether an irrigation meter is used, all new landscape irrigation systems for single-family residences shall include the following: 
(1)  Backflow prevention assembly; 
a.  Any new irrigation system installed within the city shall have installed an approved backflow prevention device at the point of service connection. The device must be tested after installation and annually, thereafter, by a certified tester in backflow prevention, pursuit to federal and state law for safe drinking water and the City of Roswell's Ordinance [section] 24.5.26. 
b.  Any irrigation system installed before January 1, 2007 must be retrofitted with an approved backflow prevention device no later than March 1, 2019. Failure to comply may result in the termination of water service. 
(2)  A WaterSense controller; and 
(3)  A rain sensor shut-off installed in an area that is unobstructed by trees, roof over hangs, or anything else that might block rain from triggering the rain sensor shutoff. 
a.  Any new irrigation system installed within the city must be equipped with a rain sensing device. Although not mandatory, a freeze gauge is also recommended. 
b.  Any irrigation system installed before January 1, 2005 shall be required to install a rain sensing device when irrigation system is repaired or replaced. 
(f)  Large landscape irrigation system requirements. Regardless of whether an irrigation meter is used, new landscape irrigation systems for large landscapes shall include the following: 
(1)  Applicable backflow prevention, a WaterSense controller, and the rain sensor shut-off as required of all new landscape irrigation systems; 
(2)  A master shut-off valve for each controller installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water but downstream of the backflow prevention assembly; 
(3)  Pressure-regulating devices such as valve pressure regulators, sprinkler head pressure regulators, inline pressure regulators, or other devices shall be installed as needed to achieve the manufacturer's recommended pressure range at the emission devices for optimal performance; and 
(4)  At least one (1) flow sensor, which must be installed at or near the supply point of the landscape irrigation system, that when connected to the WaterSense controller will detect and report high flow conditions to such controller and automatically shut master valves. 
(g)  Compliance self-certifications for one (1) inche and larger service connections. 
Option 1: As a condition of selling a new water meter or irrigation meter for any new service connection of one (1) inch or larger, the purchaser of such meter shall submit a certification of compliance along with any other required paperwork and project information as may be required. 
(1)  Such certification of compliance shall include a certification that one (1) of the following is true and correct: 
a.  The development will not include any landscape irrigation systems; 
b.  The development will include a landscape irrigation system that does not serve a large landscape, and as a result the system will only include applicable backflow prevention, a WaterSense controller, and the rain sensor shut-off; or 
c.  The development will include a landscape irrigation system that does serve a large landscape, and as a result all requirements in subsection (f) will be met. 
(2)  For all new services connection of one (1) inch or larger, the City of Roswell's shall receive the signed certification of compliance and determine whether all required information has been provided. If the certification of compliance has not been completed with all required information, the City of Roswell's shall return the certificate of compliance to the purchaser specifying what information is missing and ask that a complete certificate be resubmitted. 
Option 2: All plans for development involving any new service connection of one (1) inch or larger shall include a certification, through written statements in plan documents or on drawings, that the following is true and correct: 
(1)  The development will not include any landscape irrigation systems; 
(2)  The development will include a landscape irrigation system that does not serve a large landscape, and as a result the system will only include applicable backflow prevention, a WaterSense controller, and the rain sensor shut-off; or 
(3)  The development will include a landscape irrigation system that does serve a large landscape, and as a result all requirements in subsection (f) will be met. 
If the certification is not included with all required information, the City of Roswell's shall notify the purchaser specifying what information is missing and ask that documentation with the complete certification be submitted. 
(h)  Variances. The city may, in special cases, grant variances from the provisions of subsection (e)(2) or (3) to persons demonstrating extreme hardship and need. The city may grant variances only under all of the following circumstances and conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must sign a compliance agreement on forms provided by the city, and approved by the city attorney, agreeing to irrigate or water a lawn or landscape only in the amount and manner permitted by the variance. 
(2)  Granting of a variance must not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water supply. 
(3)  The extreme hardship or need requiring the variance must relate to the health, safety, or welfare of the person requesting it. 
(4)  The health, safety, and welfare of other persons must not be adversely affected by granting the variance. 
(i)  Revocation of variances. The city may revoke a variance granted when the city determines that: 
(1)  The conditions of subsection (h) are not being met or are no longer applicable; 
(2)  The terms of the compliance agreement are being violated; or 
(3)  The health, safety, or welfare of other persons requires revocation. 
(j)  Penalties for violations. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), pursuant [to] section 1.1.3. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Water service may also be terminated and the customer or consumer will be subject to a disconnection fee and reconnection fee once water is restored as per [section] 24.5.6. 
(1)  Violations include: 
a.  Installation, causing or permitting the installation of a new irrigation system in violation of subsections (e) and (f); or 
b.  Operating, causing or permitting the operation of an irrigation system that does not comply with subsections (e) and (f). 
( 2019-02-11 , § 1, Amended 02/25/2019; Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.23 - Commercial Car Wash. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
(2)  Applicability. 
a.  This section applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
b.  The provisions of this section do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
c.  The provisions of this section do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, have the meaning defined in this section: 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(b)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. All new commercial conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011 must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of water used will be recycled. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.24 - Use of fire hydrants. 
No person shall be allowed to use water from any fire hydrant connected to the water system owned by the city, except by special permit from the environmental/public works department. The customer shall be charged for the quantity of water used at the current water rates in effect as established by resolution and approved by mayor and city council. 
A deposit, as established by resolution and approved by mayor and city council, shall be required with each application for installation of a hydrant meter. Part of the deposit may be credited against the water charge for the hydrant usage when the meter is removed. If the meter is damaged prior to removal by the city, charges against the deposit shall be applied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Added 7/10/2017) 
Section 24.5.25 - Reserved. 
Section 24.5.26 - Cross-Connections and Backflow-Prevention. 
(a)  The director of the environmental/public works department or his/her designee is authorized to discontinue water service to prevent contamination/pollution of the public water supply/system due to possible cross-connections or when necessary to protect the water supply/system or individual properties from emergency cross-connections or backflow situations. 
(b)  The department of environmental/public works and/or building inspections department are further authorized to install, or require to be installed, suitable backflow-prevention device(s) at the customer's/owner's service connection(s) or other areas as needed to prevent contamination or the risk thereof for the public water system. 
(c)  The department of environmental/public works and building inspections department shall reserve the right to periodically inspect and test any backflow-prevention device(s). Installation, testing and repairs shall be in accordance with the department of public works backflow-prevention by containment policy and procedures. Inoperative or faulty device(s) shall be promptly repaired/replaced by the customer/owner or water service shall be terminated. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), pursuant section 1.1.3. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Water service may also be terminated and the customer or consumer will be subject to a disconnection fee and reconnection fee once water is restored as per section 24.5.6. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Sections 24.5.27—24.5.30 - Reserved. 
Section 24.5.31 - Emergency Restrictions on Water Use—Application of Restrictions. 
All customers and consumers of water services are hereby required to comply with the following restrictions as a condition of continued water services: 
(a)  The use of water by hose or automatic sprinkling device, for the purpose of sprinkling or watering outside plant material, such outside plant material being defined to include lawns, vegetable and flower gardens, plants and trees, may be required to abide by a mandatory even/odd system of watering on alternating days during the week from Sunday through Saturday, or complete outdoor watering ban. These restrictions shall apply uniformly to all premises served by the water system, including residences, businesses, and private and governmental institutions. 
(b)  The director of environmental/public works or his/her designee is authorized to impose such restrictions as may be necessary to alleviate emergency conditions, and is further authorized to make exception to the general restrictions imposed on businesses in respect to those businesses such as carwashes, nurseries, and the like, that depend upon greater amounts of water supply for their livelihood. 
(c)  Alternate water sources such as wells, ponds, streams, lakes, etc. may be required to abide by a mandatory even/odd system of watering on alternating days during the week from Sunday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.31.1 - Restriction on Outdoor Water of Landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses during non-drought periods: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.31.2 - Other Outdoor Uses During Non-Drought Periods. 
For outdoor uses not associated with landscape watering: car washing, pressure washing, outdoor cleaning, pool filling, etc. The following rules apply during non-drought periods: 
(a)  Odd-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(b)  Even-numbered addresses: Outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.31.3 - Outdoor Water Use Schedule During Declared Drought Response Levels. 
Outdoor water use and exemptions during state-declared drought levels are in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 391-3-30.04 and O.C.G.A. § 391-3-30.05. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.31.4 - Right to Curtail Water usage During Emergency Conditions. 
(a)  Authority. The city may, upon application to and approval by the director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia, for good cause shown, impose more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use during non-drought periods or state-declared periods of drought than those applicable restrictions, if any, imposed by the state during such periods. For purposes of this subsection, 'good cause' means evidence sufficient to support a reasonable conclusion, considering available relevant information, that such additional restrictions are necessary and appropriate to avoid or relieve a local water shortage. A variance granted pursuant to this subsection shall be valid for such period as determined by the director. 
(b)  Emergency conditions. For the purposes of this section only, emergency conditions shall include, but not be limited to times of drought, low stream flows, interruptions in the raw water supply due to breaks or contamination, inability of the filter plants to meet demand, excessive losses or demands in the distribution system due to breaks, fires or other causes, contamination in the finished water, or any other purpose for which the curtailed use of water might be reasonably required in the best interest of public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city's director of environmental/public works. 
(c)  Restrictions. The water conservation measures may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as swimming pool filling, watering of lawns and gardens, washing of recreational or other vehicles, equipment, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios and other paved areas, recreational uses, and other uses that the city's public works/environmental director may deem to be nonessential and that have been approved by the director of environmental protection division. 
(d)  Notice. A notice of the restrictions or prohibitions imposed under this section and approved by the director of the environmental protection division shall be published in the city's legal organ in a non-legal section. The notice shall set forth the specific nature of the restrictions or prohibitions, the reasons for the imposition of the restrictions or prohibitions, the date upon which the restrictions or prohibitions become effective, and their duration. The restrictions and prohibitions shall become effective no sooner than the first day following the publication date of the first notice. The notice shall be published once a month while the restrictions and prohibitions are in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.31.5 - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(b)  The environmental/public works department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city administrator may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means pursuant to section 1.1.3. Water service may also be terminated and the customer or consumer will be subject to a disconnection fee and reconnection fee once water is restored as per 24-5-6. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.31.6 - Section Cumulative. 
The provisions of sections 24.5.31.1 through 24.5.31.5 are cumulative to those set out in section 24.5.31. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.32 - Penalties; Termination of Service. 
The director of environmental/public works or his/her designee and the chief of police or his designee, are hereby authorized and directed to monitor compliance with the above restrictions, issue a citation which imposes up to a one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) fine, and upon continued violations, to terminate service to any premises at which such restrictions are not observed, as follows: 
(a)  The first time a customer or consumer violates the above restrictions; a citation will be issued imposing not less than a three hundred dollars ($300.00) fine. 
(b)  The second time that a customer or consumer fails to comply with the above restrictions; a citation shall be issued imposing up to a seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) fine. 
(c)  The third time of noncompliance, water service can be terminated to the premises where noncompliance occurred, and a warrant be served upon the customer or consumer to appear before the magistrate of Fulton County or Roswell municipal court. A disconnect and reconnect fee shall be imposed under section 24.5.3. 
(d)  In the case of multiunit residential dwellings known to be served by a single meter, water service shall not be terminated unless and until written notification is given to the person in whose name the water bill is issued, that the procedures stated in subsections (a), (b), and (c) above will apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.33 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision hereunder may appeal to the director of the department of environmental/public works or his/her designee, for relief or reconsideration. Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the director relating to the application of these regulations may file an appeal with the mayor and council of the city within thirty (30) days of the decision of the director of environmental/public works. Appeals shall only be granted where unique circumstances are such that application of these regulations would create an undue hardship to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Section 24.5.34 - Modification of Restrictions. 
The director of environmental/public works may modify or cancel the above restrictions or add additional restrictions from time to time as the emergency conditions affecting the water system may worsen or abate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Sections 24.5.35—24.5.39 - Reserved. 
Section 24.5.40 - Private Decentralized Waste Water Systems. 
(a)  All sanitary sewer collection, maintenance and treatment in the city is owned and operated by Fulton County. 
(b)  Use of private decentralized waste water systems by multiple property owners and construction or reconstruction of private decentralized waste water systems capable of servicing multiple property owners is prohibited unless such private decentralized waste water systems meet the requirements of Fulton County. 
(c)  Private decentralized waste water systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with plans and specifications required by Fulton County Ordinance and in compliance with the Fulton County Department of Health and Wellness Environmental Health Services Division regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; 2011-01-01, § 2, Added, 01/18/2011) 
Section 24.5.41 - Septic Tank and Septic Tank Drainage; Permit to Install Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any septic tank or septic tank drainage, without first obtaining a permit from the Fulton County Department of Health and Wellness Environmental Health Services Division for such installation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, adopted July 10, 2017, repealed § 24.5.41, which pertained to damaging sewer lines; penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, adopted July 6, 2009. Said ordinance then renumbered §§ 24.5.42 and 24.5.43 as §§ 24.5.41 and 24.5.42. 
Section 24.5.42 - Specifications for Septic Tanks. 
All septic tanks and septic tank drainage systems shall be installed according to the regulations and specifications of the Fulton County Department of Health and Wellness Environmental Health Services Division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07-08 , § 1, Amended 7/10/2017; Ord. No. 2009-07-11, § 1, 07/06/2009) 
Editor's note— See editor's note for § 24.5.41. 
Article 24.6 - Adoption of Roswell Dredging Assistance Policy[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-05-14 , § 1, adopted May 27, 2015, repealed the former Art. 24.6, § 24.6.1, and enacted a new Art. 24.6 as set out herein. The former Art. 24.6 pertained to the adoption of Roswell Lakes and Ponds Partnership Policy and derived from Ord. No. 2002-12-04, adopted Dec. 16, 2002 and Ord. No. 2004-01-02, adopted Jan. 5, 2004. 

Section 24.6.1 - Dredging Assistance Policy. 
(a)  The city hereby declares that it is a matter of public health, safety and welfare to protect the water resources of the city and to satisfy standards regarding water quality and quantity. 
(b)  Partnership policy. In conjunction with the city's program objective to increase the ability of the network of lakes and ponds to satisfy water quantity and quality objectives, and subject to satisfaction of the program criteria, the city may assist interested property owners in the dredging of their lakes and ponds by paying a portion of the cost of sediment removal or related construction costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  No program funds will be considered for reimbursement or disbursed unless the following are met: 
(1)  A dredging application is obtained from and submitted to the environmental/public works department of the city for approval; 
(2)  All applications recommended for approval by the city staff must receive the approval of the mayor and council prior to the commencement of the work; 
(3)  Payment will be made only with respect to the actual cost of pre-approved work completed to the satisfaction of the city; 
(4)  Payment will be made only after execution of appropriate lien waivers, as determined solely by the city. 
(d)  Dredging eligibility criteria. If a lake or pond has a drainage area of at least one hundred (100) acres or design storage of at least twenty-acre feet, it qualifies for dredging assistance. Owners of lakes or ponds which do not meet these criteria may petition the mayor and council for inclusion. The merits of including such lakes or ponds shall be reported to mayor and council by the department director of environmental/public works. 
(e)  Reimbursement for approved applications. 
(1)  The city may reimburse approved applicants for approved project elements up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of approved actual cost. The maximum reimbursement will be five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per approved dredging project or lake. Multiple dredging projects for a specific lake or lakes will not be approved more frequently than every ten (10) years unless approved in advance by mayor and council. 
(2)  Approved applications may be funded as funds are budgeted by mayor and council and allocated under the city's normal budget process. Upon approval applicants may be funded on a "first come first serve basis". The city is under no obligation to continue this policy and may re-prioritize the city's budget at any time. 
(3)  The applicant must submit satisfactory evidence that the pre-approved work has been completed together with: 
a.  An invoice with a copy of all applicable receipts; and 
b.  A summary of all applicable dredging expenses; and 
c.  Satisfactory lien waivers; and 
d.  Such other information as may be required by the city. 
f.  Application and dredging project requirements: 
1.  In order for the dredging of a lake or pond to be accepted into the program, the following criteria must be met: 
i.  Dredging plans must be submitted and approved by the environmental/public works department. Plans will need to meet the city land disturbance permitting requirements. 
ii.  All work must be performed by a licensed and insured contractor hired by the applicant(s). Such contractor must have past experience sufficient to satisfy the city. 
iii.  All work must be properly permitted by the city and all other appropriate governmental agencies. 
iv.  Project design and dredging plans and specifications must be submitted to the city for review and approval thru the city design approval process. Dredging plans must, at a minimum, include details with respect to the spoilage of dredged material; such spoilage must be properly permitted by the city and all other appropriate governmental agencies. Details of the proposed dredging project, bank stabilization and other erosion control measures, during and after project completion, including all items necessary to satisfy city requirements to forestall future sedimentation and erosion, shall be provided to the city. 
v.  It is expressly understood that the city shall have no responsibility for the testing or disposal of hazardous wastes, or any other material collected in the project. 
vi.  All work must begin within one (1) year of approval of the application by the mayor and council, provided mayor and council may extend such period in their sole discretion. An extension shall be requested and submitted in writing to the department director of environmental/public works. 
2.  The department director of environmental/public works shall consider the dredging assistance project in light of the city stormwater management program objectives and specifically address the following questions: 
i.  Whether the pond proposed for dredging is an essential part of the municipal drainage system based on a hydrology and water quality analysis of the drainage area. 
ii.  Whether the work to be performed will benefit the citizens of Roswell as a whole. 
(g)  Other requirements and limitations. 
(1)  Receipt of program funds will require the execution of a release in favor of the city, suitable to the city attorney, as to any and all claims for damages as a result of siltation or erosion. 
(2)  Dam maintenance and repair costs, including costs for appurtenant structures and facilities such as spillways, outlet control structures and gates, will not be reimbursed in any amount and are not part of dredging assistance. Landscaping improvements, road improvements or maintenance, and other items not directly related to dredging of the lake or pond, in the sole determination of the city's stormwater management division, shall not be eligible for reimbursement. 
(3)  Siltation of a lake or pond must not have been the predominant result of land disturbance activity on the part of the property owner(s) making application under the program or any predecessor in title of said property owner(s). 
(4)  Applicants shall execute, in favor of the city, a permanent easement to allow for access to the lake or pond by city personnel for inspection of the lake or pond and for any work deemed necessary by the city. If the applicant fails to complete the work as deemed necessary, the city may complete the work and assess the properties as allowed by the charter of the city. 
(5)  The city shall have the right to require upstream or downstream measures to minimize incoming sediment and the potential for channel erosion downstream (i.e. forebay). Such measures may be reimbursed as provided herein upon approval of the city. 
(6)  Applicants shall covenant to continue operation of the lake or pond for use as part of the city's stormwater management system according to plans approved by the city and must further covenant to make no changes to the lake or pond structure without the prior, written consent of the city. The form of covenants shall satisfy the city attorney as binding the real estate involved. 
( 2015-05-14 , § 1, Added 05/27/2015) 
Article 24.7 - Scrap Tire Management 

Section 24.7.1 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 1 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 2 
Person means the State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 3 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling replacement tires. 4 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 5 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 6 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 7 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 8 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 9 
1 As defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51. 
2 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
3 As defined in section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
4 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
5 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
6 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
7 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
8 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
9 As defined in section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Section 24.7.2 - General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the city including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless such scrap tires originate in the city or other areas authorized by the city council and: 
1.  The property is designated by the city council or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; 
2.  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
3.  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20, et seq. Applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this ordinance are more stringent. 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Section 24.7.3 - Accumulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate more than four (4) scrap tires on or around property which they own or occupy. 
(b)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to one hundred (100) scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of seven hundred fifty (750) scrap tires. 
(c)  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Section 24.7.4 - Violations and Penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Municipal Court of Roswell, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00 1 , or up to thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the city from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the city to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be fined not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to sixty (60) days imprisonment, or both. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(b)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this ordinance; and/or 
(c)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by violation 2 ; and/or 
(d)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this ordinance. The city will not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(e)  The expenses incurred by the city for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this ordinance. 
(f)  In addition to actions filed by the city for violations of this ordinance, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
1  As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.l).  2  As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-53(d). 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Section 24.7.5 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Roswell City Council, their designee, or environmental enforcement officer. 
(b)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this ordinance shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this ordinance, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this ordinance must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Section 24.7.6 - Civil Remedies and Abatement of Nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provisions of this ordinance, the city or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation 1 . In addition, the city may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other city issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this ordinance, the court may incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this ordinance for which said violator is convicted. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person to properly address said provisions of the court within twenty (20) days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the city council is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the ordinance on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city shall be chargeable to the violator and shall be sent certified mail return receipt requested to owner of said property. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within thirty (30) days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the city counsel or representative shall cause to be recorded in the Execution Docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the city, the dates of city action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
1  As provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-52, 16-7-53. 
(2003-06-11, Added, 06/02/2003) 
Article 24.8 - Stormwater Utility 

Section 24.8.1 - Findings. 
The City of Roswell Mayor and City Council make the following findings of fact: 
(a)  The city is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services throughout the city. 
(b)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the government of the city hereby exercises its authority to establish a Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and establish rates for stormwater management services. 
(c)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, the city is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Charter of the city to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. 
(d)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within the city. 
(e)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. 
(f)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for its comprehensive program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs. 
(g)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater can adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by Fulton County thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
(h)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the further degradation of the water quality in area waterbodies which may result in higher levels of treatment requirements imposed on Fulton County's wastewater treatment facilities and increased water treatment cost of potable water supplies by the city. 
(i)  The city is required under federal and state regulations [i.e. the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase I Georgia Notice of Intent (NOI) and Stormwater Permit] to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States' waters. 
(j)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the NPDES permit, along with other city stormwater program activities, will substantially increase the cost of providing stormwater management services above what is currently being spent for water quality management, drainage system maintenance, flood control and other program activities. 
(k)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city Stormwater Management System and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. 
(l)  The professional engineering and financing analysis, known as the Stormwater Utility Feasibility Study and related documents, dated December 14, 2006 and prepared by the city's consulting stormwater engineer, which report is incorporated herein by express reference, properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. 
(m)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(n)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the incorporated areas of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(o)  The stormwater needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the city in a variety of ways as described in the Stormwater Utility Feasibility Study and related documents, dated December 14, 2006. 
(p)  The services and benefits rendered, or resulting from provision of stormwater management services, may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of improved properties in proportion to the long term demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management services which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. 
(q)  A stormwater management program (SWMP) provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services within the city through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms as described in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Report, and the other related documents, that have been prepared for the city by its consultants. 
(r)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Such user fee charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(s)  Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(t)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the city's SWMP, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater manager. Reductions or credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the property. 
(u)  The area of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city or to be provided by the city in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. 
(v)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the city stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 1, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.2 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
Credit means a reduction in the amount of a stormwater user fee charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the city's cost of providing stormwater management services for that particular property. 
Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, improved properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's SWMP and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems for the handling of stormwater runoff from private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities, and activities. 
Residential property or RES means improved property containing one residential structure which is not attached to another dwelling, and which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one (1) family. Residential property shall also mean improved property containing individually owned, attached dwelling units such as duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, townhouses, or other residential structures not listed herein where one (1) or more family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. A residential property may include a home located on one (1) or more individual lots or parcels of land. Improved property may be classified as a residential property even if there is present incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guest houses, or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces. Residential properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes (i.e. hotels, motels, retirement centers, nursing homes or assisted living homes). 
Improved property means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of impervious surfaces. 
Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, which contains one (1) or more bedrooms, a bathroom and a kitchen facility. 
Equivalent runoff unit (ERU) means the statistical median horizontal impervious surface area of a detached single-family residential property within the city as of the date of adoption of this article. The horizontal impervious surface area includes, but is not limited to, all areas covered by structures, roof extensions, patios, porches, driveways and sidewalks. 
Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater, the parcel's antecedent moisture and the parcel's geologic condition. 
Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
Nonresidential property or NSFR means improved property containing multiple dwelling unit residential properties, condominiums, apartments, commercial and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, tennis courts, swimming pools, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, agricultural uses, water and wastewater treatment plants, and any other form of use not otherwise mentioned which is not a residential property (RES), and which has private parking lots and private drives or roads. 
Public Water Influence Zone means those areas lying downstream of a culvert, or other stormwater management conveyance system. On the downstream side of the conveyance system, the public water influence zone will extend for a length of six (6) times the diameter (or width) of the culvert from which runoff is being discharged (Field Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Third Edition, page 99), and within the horizontal limits set forth in the aforementioned field manual. For example, if a forty-eight-inch diameter culvert is discharging to a private property, the public water influence zone shall extend twenty-four (24) feet (6 × 48 inches) from the end of the culvert and for the specified width (i.e. typically the width of the creek). The city Stormwater Utility may perform maintenance and/or capital construction activities only within that portion of the public water influence zone which the city has an ownership interest in, or for which a dedicated easement has been granted to, and accepted by the city for such purpose. 
Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city. 
Stormwater management services mean all services provided by the city which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and 
(5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements. 
Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof. 
Stormwater management systems and facilities mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater manager means the person appointed by the city administrator to administer the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge imposed pursuant to this article by the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility for providing stormwater management services. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management services provided by the city for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered. 
Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have minimal impervious surface, which impedes the infiltration of stormwater runoff or causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of five hundred (500) square feet or less of impervious surface. 
User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 2, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.3 - Stormwater Utility and Enterprise Fund Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated areas of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the City of Roswell SWMP and stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall be used solely for stormwater management services. All expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  The city shall place responsibility with the stormwater manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the SWMP and stormwater management services performed, owned and operated or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 3, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.4 - Scope of Responsibility for Stormwater Management Systems and Facilities. 
(a)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property but within easements granted to, and accepted by, the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; 
(3)  On private property but within a public water influence zone; 
(4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management and systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its commissioners, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 4, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.5 - Stormwater Utility Customer Classes. 
(a)  There shall be one (1) stormwater utility service area in the city with specified customer classes to reflect variations in services provided to stormwater utility customers and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city stormwater management program and drainage system. The specified customer classes for the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility are as follows: 
(1)  Residential (RES) customers shall consist of properties as defined in section 24.8.2 of this article shall consist of four (4) distinct "tiers". 
i.  Tier 1 customers shall consist of RES properties with up to three thousand four hundred (3,400) square feet of impervious area on their property. 
ii.  Tier 2 customers shall consist of RES properties with three thousand four hundred one (3,401) to four thousand nine hundred fifty (4,950) square feet of impervious area on their property. 
iii.  Tier 3 customers shall consist of RES properties with four thousand nine hundred fifty-one (4,951) to ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious area on their property. 
iv.  Tier 4 customers shall consist of RES properties with more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious area on their property. 
(2)  Nonresidential (NSFR) customers shall consist of all properties located in the city that are not classified as RES. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater manager for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 5, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.6 - Stormwater User Fee Charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service areas shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, fees for special services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, system development charges and special assessments. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 6, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.7 - Stormwater User Fee Charge Rates. 
Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be set by resolution of mayor and council and may be modified from time to time by the city council. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk of the city. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the goal of the City to establish rates that are fair and reasonable, and together with other sources of support available to the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility, are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management services, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 7, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.8 - Stormwater User Fee Charge Exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(a)  Parcels which contain five hundred (500) square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(b)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way and road systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other improved property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. All other state, federal, and county properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 8, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.9 - Stormwater User Fee Charge Credits. 
(a)  The stormwater manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual attached to Ordinance No. 2008-10-14 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein, as may be amended from time to time by resolution of mayor and council. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and available from the stormwater manager. 
(1)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(2)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and/or upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The stormwater manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. 
(3)  In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(4)  Property owners may apply for any credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format established by the stormwater manager. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater manager, he shall have thirty (30) days from the date the complete application is accepted to either grant the credit in whole, grant the credit in part, or deny the credit. Credits applied for by the property owner and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 9, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.10 - Enforcement Methods and Inspections. 
(a)  All property owners of improved property within the incorporated areas of the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe and approved manner consistent with all applicable city development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the City of Roswell Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, subject to the penalties set forth in section 1.11 of the City of Roswell Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the stormwater manager, the city may elect to issue a citation in the City of Roswell Municipal Court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the City of Roswell Municipal Court, the city may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Fulton County Superior Court. 
(c)  The city shall have the right for its designated officers and employees to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; or 
(2)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 10, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.11. - Stormwater User Fee Charge Billing, Delinquencies, Collections, Adjustments. 
Failure to receive a stormwater utility bill is not justification for non-payment. The property owner, as identified from public land records of Fulton County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property. 
(a)  Billing. 
(1)  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue July 1, 2009, and shall be billed prospectively. The initial billing cycle will be July 1, 2009 through August 31, 2009. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed, the amount of the stormwater user fee charge (less any credits), the date the payment is due, and the date when payment is past due. 
(2)  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected as deemed most effective and efficient by the city council. 
(3)  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the city council. 
(4)  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. 
(5)  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of improved property, the City of Roswell Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one (1) year, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. 
(b)  Delinquencies and collection. 
(1)  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner and/or the property. 
(2)  A late charge of one and one-half (1½) percent per month shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility user fee charge that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable state law. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(c)  Adjustments. 
(1)  The stormwater manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
i.  If a customer believes their stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
ii.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide supplemental information to the stormwater manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer of the impervious surfaces on the subject property. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request. 
iii.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater manager, the stormwater manager shall have thirty (30) calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. 
iv.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater utility user fee charge for the property is correct. 
v.  The stormwater manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
vi.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater bill. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 11, 10/06/2008) 
Section 24.8.12 - Appeals, Hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city administrator may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater manager. The appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision of the stormwater manager by filing with the city administrator a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater manager shall forthwith transmit to the city administrator all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing. The city administrator shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city administrator shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. 
(c)  [Decision final; appeal.] The decision of the city administrator shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative action. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city administrator may appeal that decision to the Superior Court of Fulton County by Writ of Certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2008-10-14, § 12 10/06/2008) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted by the City of Roswell since June 2, 2008, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 

 